Policy Manual
The USCIS Policy Manual is the agency’s centralized online repository for USCIS’ immigration policies. The USCIS Policy Manual will ultimately replace the Adjudicator’s Field Manual (AFM), the USCIS Immigration Policy Memoranda site, and other policy repositories.

About the Policy Manual
The USCIS Policy Manual is the agency’s centralized online repository for USCIS’ immigration policies. The Policy Manual is replacing the Adjudicator’s Field Manual (AFM), the USCIS Immigration Policy Memoranda site, and other USCIS policy repositories. The Policy Manual contains separate volumes pertaining to different areas of immigration benefits administered by the agency, such as citizenship and naturalization, adjustment of status, and nonimmigrants. The content is organized into different volumes, parts, and chapters.

The Policy Manual provides transparency of immigration policies and furthers consistency, quality, and efficiency consistent with the USCIS mission. The Policy Manual provides all the latest policy updates; an expanded table of contents; keyword search function; and links to the Immigration and Nationality Act and Code of Federal Regulations, as well as public use forms. The Policy Manual contains tables and charts to facilitate understanding of complex topics. The Policy Manual also contains all historical policy updates.

The Policy Manual contains the official policies of USCIS and assists immigration officers in rendering decisions. The Policy Manual is to be followed by all USCIS officers in the performance of their duties but it does not remove their discretion in making adjudicatory decisions. The Policy Manual does not create any substantive or procedural right or benefit that is legally enforceable by any party against the United States or its agencies or officers or any other person.

Volume 2 - Nonimmigrants
Part A - Nonimmigrant Policies and Procedures
In May 2020, USCIS retired its Adjudicator’s Field Manual (AFM), a collection of our immigration policies and procedures. We are working quickly to update and incorporate all of the AFM content into the USCIS Policy Manual, the agency’s centralized online repository for immigration policies. Until then, we have moved any remaining AFM content to its corresponding Policy Manual Part. To the extent that a provision in the Policy Manual conflicts with remaining AFM content or Policy Memoranda, the updated information in the Policy Manual prevails. If you have questions or concerns about any discrepancies among these resources, contact USCISPolicyManual@uscis.dhs.gov.

AFM Chapter 30 - Nonimmigrants in General (External) (PDF, 412.67 KB)

AFM Chapter 61 - Bonds (External) (PDF, 77.92 KB)

Chapter 1 - Purpose and Background
A. Purpose
A nonimmigrant is a noncitizen who is admitted to the United States for a specific temporary period of time. Section 101(a)(15) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) lists most categories of nonimmigrants; additionally, nonimmigrant categories may be authorized in legislation other than the INA.[1] In order to be admitted to the United States as a nonimmigrant, the noncitizen must generally have a permanent residence abroad and qualify for the nonimmigrant classification sought.

B. Background
The U.S. Department of State (DOS) issues nonimmigrant visas at U.S. embassies and consulates abroad. Background and history specific to each nonimmigrant visa is discussed in the category-specific parts of the Policy Manual.

C. Legal Authorities
INA 101(a)(15) – Nonimmigrant classifications

INA 214; 8 CFR 214 – Admission of nonimmigrants and nonimmigrant classes; extension of stay

INA 248; 8 CFR 248 – Change of nonimmigrant classification


For example, certain professional nonimmigrants are authorized under the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and implementing legislation and regulations. See 8 CFR 214.6.

Chapter 2 - General Requirements [Reserved]
Chapter 3 - Maintaining Status [Reserved]
Chapter 4 - Extension of Stay, Change of Status, and Extension of Petition Validity
A. Extension of Stay or Change of Status
Generally, certain nonimmigrants present in the United States admitted for a specified period of time, or their petitioners, may request an extension of their admission period in order to continue to engage in those activities permitted under the nonimmigrant classification in which they were admitted.[1]

Also, certain nonimmigrants present in the United States or their petitioners may seek to change their status to another nonimmigrant classification if certain requirements are met.[2]

A request for an extension of stay (EOS) or change of status (COS) is generally filed on a Petition for a Nonimmigrant Worker (Form I-129) or Application to Extend/Change Nonimmigrant Status (Form I-539),[3] depending upon the nonimmigrant classification the petitioner or applicant seeks to extend or change.[4]

B. Extension of Petition Validity
1. Significance of Prior USCIS Approvals and Deference
Deference to Previous Approvals

A request for an extension of petition validity, which is often submitted in conjunction with an EOS request, follows a previous finding of eligibility for the classification. Typically, these determinations are made by USCIS, although U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) and U.S. Department of State (DOS) also make these determinations. Although there is a previous finding of eligibility, the burden of proof in the request for an extension of petition validity remains on the petitioner.[5]

Officers are not bound to approve subsequent petitions or applications seeking immigration benefits where eligibility has not been demonstrated strictly because of a prior approval (which may have been erroneous).[6] USCIS decides each matter according to the evidence of record on a case-by-case basis.[7] However, deviation from a previous approval carries important consequences and implicates predictability and consistency concerns.

As such, any deviation requires close consideration of the previous approval by USCIS. When adjudicating a subsequent petition or application involving the same parties (for example, petitioner and beneficiary) and the same underlying facts, officers should defer to a prior determination that the beneficiary or applicant is eligible for the nonimmigrant classification sought, where appropriate.

Deviating from Previous Approvals

Officers should not defer to prior approvals in cases where:

There was a material error involved with previous approval(s);

There has been a material change in circumstances or eligibility requirements;[8] or

There is new material information that adversely impacts the petitioner’s or beneficiary’s eligibility.[9]

An officer who determines that deference to a prior approval is not appropriate must acknowledge the previous approval(s) in the denial, Request for Evidence (RFE), or Notice of Intent to Deny (NOID). In addition, the officer must articulate the reason for not deferring to the previous determination (for example, due to a material error, change in circumstances, or new adverse material information). Officers must provide the petitioner or applicant an opportunity to respond to the new information.[10]

As mentioned above, an officer should not defer to a prior approval where new material information is available. This may include publicly available information that affects eligibility for a benefit. For example, an officer may be aware that a petitioner has recently gone out of business. This also includes information that affects national security or public safety garnered from security checks conducted on beneficiaries and petitioners. An officer should not defer to a prior approval when there are indicators of potential fraud or willful misrepresentation of a material fact. The officer must articulate the new material information in an RFE or NOID.

In all cases, officers must obtain supervisory approval before deviating from a prior approval in their final decision.

2. Cases Involving Previous Determinations by Other Agencies
USCIS officers consider, but do not defer to, previous eligibility determinations on petitions or applications made by CBP or DOS.[11] Officers make determinations on the petition filed with USCIS and corresponding evidence on record, as provided above.

C. Split Decisions in Extension Requests
Officers may, when warranted, deny an applicant or petitioner’s request to extend the nonimmigrant’s stay in the United States in the same classification.[12] Even if an applicant or petitioner continues to demonstrate eligibility for the nonimmigrant classification, an officer may determine that sufficient reason exists to deny the request for an extension of stay (such as inadmissibility factors or failure to maintain status).

This “split” decision process may result in approval of the petition for the same classification where the petitioner and the beneficiary relationship has not changed, and a simultaneous denial of the extension of stay request.



Part B - Diplomatic and International Organization Personnel (A, G)
In May 2020, USCIS retired its Adjudicator’s Field Manual (AFM), a collection of our immigration policies and procedures. We are working quickly to update and incorporate all of the AFM content into the USCIS Policy Manual, the agency’s centralized online repository for immigration policies. Until then, we have moved any remaining AFM content to its corresponding Policy Manual Part. To the extent that a provision in the Policy Manual conflicts with remaining AFM content or Policy Memoranda, the updated information in the Policy Manual prevails. If you have questions or concerns about any discrepancies among these resources, contact USCISPolicyManual@uscis.dhs.gov.

AFM Chapter 30 - Nonimmigrants in General (External) (PDF, 412.67 KB)

Part C - Visitors for Business or Tourism (B)
Part D - Exchange Visitors (J)
In May 2020, USCIS retired its Adjudicator’s Field Manual (AFM), a collection of our immigration policies and procedures. We are working quickly to update and incorporate all of the AFM content into the USCIS Policy Manual, the agency’s centralized online repository for immigration policies. Until then, we have moved any remaining AFM content to its corresponding Policy Manual Part. To the extent that a provision in the Policy Manual conflicts with remaining AFM content or Policy Memoranda, the updated information in the Policy Manual prevails. If you have questions or concerns about any discrepancies among these resources, contact USCISPolicyManual@uscis.dhs.gov.

AFM Chapter 45 - Waiver of Section 212(e) Foreign Residence Requirement (External) (PDF, 178.03 KB)

Part E - Cultural Visitors (Q)
Chapter 1 - Purpose and Background
A. Purpose
The Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) provides a nonimmigrant classification for noncitizen participants coming temporarily to the United States to participate “in an international cultural exchange program approved by the Secretary of Homeland Security for the purpose of providing practical training, employment, and the sharing of the history, culture, and traditions of the country of the alien’s nationality and who will be employed under the same wages and working conditions as domestic workers.”[1]

B. Background
In 1990, Congress created new immigration classification for cultural visitors, commonly known as the “Q” visa category.[2] The implementing regulation establishes the process by which DHS evaluates both the proposed international cultural exchange program and the prospective Q nonimmigrants.[3] The cultural exchange program must have a cultural component that “is an essential and integral part of the international cultural exchange visitor’s employment or training.”[4] The Q nonimmigrants must meet age, qualifications for the job, and communication requirements. Petitions seeking Q-1 status may be filed for multiple participants.[5]

C. Legal Authorities
INA 101(a)(15)(Q) – Definition of Q nonimmigrant classification

8 CFR 214.2(q) – Cultural visitors


Chapter 2 - Eligibility Requirements
A. Petitioner Requirements
1. Qualified Employer
A qualified employer is a United States or foreign firm, corporation, non-profit organization, or other legal entity, including its U.S. branches, subsidiaries, affiliates, and franchises,[1] which:

Is actively doing business in the United States;[2] and

Administers a DHS-designated international cultural exchange program.[3] 

Doing business means the regular, systematic, and continuous provision of goods or services (including lectures, seminars and other types of cultural programs) by a qualified employer which has employees, and does not include the mere presence of an agent or office of the qualifying employer.[4]

To establish eligibility as a qualified employer, the petitioner must provide evidence that it maintains an established international cultural exchange program.[5]  

2. Agent
A designated agent may file the petition if he or she is employed by the employer on a permanent basis in an executive or managerial capacity and is a U.S. citizen, a noncitizen lawfully admitted for permanent residence, or a noncitizen provided temporary residence status under INA 210 or INA 245A.[6]

B. Program Requirements
1. Accessibility to the Public
The culture sharing must take place in a school, museum, business or other establishment where the American public, or a segment of the public sharing a common cultural interest, is exposed to aspects of a foreign culture as part of a structured program. A private home or an isolated business setting that is not open to direct access by the public would not qualify.[7]

2. Cultural Component
The program must have a cultural component that is an essential and integral part of the participant’s employment or training, and is designed to exhibit or explain the attitude, customs, history, heritage, philosophy, or traditions of the participant’s country of nationality.[8] The cultural component may include structured instructional activities, such as:

Seminars;

Courses;

Lecture series; or

Language camps.[9]

3. Work Component
The participant’s employment or training in the United States may not be independent of the cultural component of the international cultural exchange program. The work component must serve as the vehicle to achieve the objectives of the cultural component of the program. In other words, the participant’s work or training in the United States must be tied to the cultural component which is to exhibit or explain attitude, customs, history, heritage, philosophy or traditions of the participant's country of nationality.

The sharing of the culture of the participant’s country of nationality must result from his or her employment or training with the qualified employer in the United States.[10]

4. Services in More than One Location
The participant may engage in employment or training in different locations for the same employer. If there are different locations, the petition must include an itinerary with the dates and locations of the services, labor, or training to be performed.[11] The employment occurring at each location must meet the requirements of an international exchange program.

C. Participant Requirements
1. Participant Requirements
Participants in Q-1 cultural exchange programs must:[12]

Be at least 18 years of age at the time the petition is filed;

Be qualified to perform the service or labor or receive the training stated in the petition; and

Have the ability to communicate effectively about the cultural attributes of his or her country of nationality[13] with the American public.

In addition, participants who have previously spent 15 months in the United States as a Q-1 nonimmigrant must have resided and been physically present outside the United States for the immediate prior year.[14] Brief trips into the United States do not break the continuity of the 1-year foreign residency.[15]

2. Family Members
The Q-1 nonimmigrant classification does not have a provision for any spouse or children to accompany or follow to join a Q-1 nonimmigrant. Therefore, any spouse or children wishing to enter the United States must qualify independently for a nonimmigrant classification.


Chapter 3 - Filing and Documentation
A. Filing Process
A qualified employer or its designated agent may file a Petition for a Nonimmigrant Worker (Form I-129), with the Q-1 Classification Supplement and required fee, generally within the 6-month period before the participant’s employment begins. A petitioner may include multiple participants on one petition.[1] A participant may provide services, labor, or training for more than one employer at a time, provided each employer files a separate petition.[2]

A petitioner must file a new petition on Form I-129, with the applicable fee, each time it wants to bring in additional international cultural exchange visitors. Each person named on an approved petition will be admitted only for the duration of the approved program. Replacement or substitution may be made for any person named on an approved petition, but only for the remainder of the approved program.[3]

B. Evidence
1. Evidence Relating to the Employer
The petitioner must provide evidence that demonstrates that the employer:

Has designated a qualified employee as a representative who will be responsible for administering the program and will serve as a liaison with USCIS;

Is actively doing business in the United States (for example, the regular, systematic and continuous provisions of goods or services, including lectures, seminars and other types of cultural programs);

Will offer the participant(s) wages and working conditions comparable to those accorded local domestic workers similarly employed; and  

Has the financial ability to remunerate the participant(s).[4]

Evidence to demonstrate financial ability to remunerate the participants includes the organization’s most recent annual report, business income tax return, or other form of certified accountant’s report.

2. Evidence Relating to the Program
The petitioner must provide evidence that the employer maintains an established international exchange program that meets the factor listed in the Program Requirements section above.[5] In addition to the position description, evidence that can show the program has a cultural component which is an essential and integral part of the participant’s employment or training may include:

Catalogs;

Brochures;

Curriculum; or

Any other evidence describing the program.

The program’s cultural component must be designed, on the whole, to exhibit or explain the attitude, customs, history, heritage, philosophy, traditions, or other cultural attributes (arts, literature, language) of the participant’s country of nationality.[6] If there are different locations, the petition must include an itinerary with the dates and locations of the services, labor, or training to be performed.[7]

Multiple Petitions in Same Calendar Year

When petitioning to repeat a previously approved international cultural exchange program, petitioners may submit a copy of the initial program approval notice in lieu of the documentation required with an initial filing.[8] Officers should request additional documentation only if clarification is needed.[9]

3. Evidence Relating to the Participants
The record must contain documentation of the following information for each participant:

Date of birth;

Country of nationality;

Level of education;

Position title; and

Job description. [10]

The petitioner must verify and certify that the participants are qualified to perform the service or labor, or receive the type of training, described in the petition.[11] In addition, the petitioner must report the participants’ wages and certify they are offered wages and working conditions comparable to those accorded to local domestic workers similarly employed.[12]

For petitions involving multiple participants, the petitioner must include the name, date of birth, nationality, and other identifying information required on the petition for each participant. The petitioner must also indicate the U.S. consulate at which each participant will apply for a Q-1 visa. For participants who are visa-exempt,[13] the petitioner must indicate the port of entry at which each participant will apply for admission to the United States.[14]

Finally, if the participant has spent an aggregate of 15 months in the United States as a Q-1 nonimmigrant, the petitioner must document that the participant has resided and been physically present outside the United States for the immediate prior year.[15]



Chapter 4 - Adjudication
A. Approvals
If the petitioner properly filed the Petition for a Nonimmigrant Worker (Form I-129) and the officer is satisfied that the petitioner has met the required eligibility standards, the officer should approve the petition. The approval period should not exceed the maximum period of stay allowed, which is the length of the approved program, or 15 months, whichever is shorter.[1] The petitioner must demonstrate that the program will run 15 straight months in order to obtain a validity period of that length.[2]

1. Substitution of Beneficiaries
A petitioner may substitute or replace a participant named on an approved petition for the remainder of the program without filing a new Form I-129.[3] The substituting cultural exchange visitor must meet the qualifications for a participant.[4]

Petitioners seeking to substitute a participant must submit a letter to the consulate at which the participant will apply for the visa or at the port of entry in the case of a visa-exempt noncitizen, along with a copy of the approval notice and the participant’s information.[5] 

2. Revocation
The approval of any petition is automatically revoked if the qualifying employer:[6]

Goes out of business;

Files a written withdrawal of the petition; or

Terminates the approved international cultural exchange program before its expiration date.

No further action or notice by USCIS is necessary in the case of automatic revocation.

A notice of intent to revoke (NOIR) is necessary upon a determination that:[7]

The international cultural exchange visitor is no longer employed by the petitioner in the capacity specified in the petition, or if the international cultural exchange visitor is no longer receiving training as specified in the petition;

The statement of facts contained in the petition was not true and correct;

The petitioner violated the terms and conditions of the approved petition; or

USCIS approved the petition in error.

The notice of intent to revoke should contain a detailed statement of the grounds for the revocation and the period of time allowed for the petitioner’s rebuttal. USCIS must consider all relevant evidence presented in deciding whether to revoke the petition in whole or in part. If the petition is revoked in part, the remainder of the petition remains approved and USCIS sends a revised approval notice to the petitioner with the revocation notice.[8]

The petitioner may appeal the decision to revoke a petition (in whole or in part) to the Administrative Appeals Office (AAO) if USCIS revoked the petition on notice. Petitioners may not appeal an automatic revocation.[9]

B. Denials
If the petitioner does not meet the eligibility requirements, the officer must deny the petition.[10] The officer may deny a petition for multiple participants in whole or in part.[11] If the officer denies the petition, he or she must prepare a final notice of action, which includes information explaining why the petition is denied.[12] Additionally, officers should include information about appeal rights and the opportunity to file a motion to reopen or reconsider in the denial notice. The office that issued the decision has jurisdiction over any motion[13] and the AAO has jurisdiction over any appeal.[14]



Chapter 5 - Admissions, Extensions of Stay, and Changes of Status
A. Admission and Limits on Extensions of Stay
If approved for nonimmigrant international cultural exchange visitor (Q-1) classification and found otherwise admissible, a beneficiary may be admitted as a Q-1 nonimmigrant for a period of up to 15 months from the date of initial admission.[1]

An officer should not approve petitions for participants who have an aggregate of 15 months in the United States as a Q-1 nonimmigrant, unless the participants have resided and been physically present outside the United States for the immediate prior year.[2]

B. Change of Status
Generally, a beneficiary in a current valid nonimmigrant status who has not violated his or her status is eligible to change status to a Q-1 nonimmigrant in the United States without having to return to his or her home country for a visa interview. USCIS may grant such a beneficiary Q-1 status for up to 15 months.[3]

To change nonimmigrant status, the petitioning employer or agent should file a Petition for a Nonimmigrant Worker (Form I-129) before the beneficiary’s current status expires and indicate the request is for a change of status.[4] The beneficiary cannot work in the new Q-1 nonimmigrant classification until USCIS approves the petition and the change of status request.

If USCIS determines that the beneficiary is eligible for Q-1 classification, but not a change of status, the beneficiary must depart the United States, apply for a Q-1 nonimmigrant visa at a U.S. consular post abroad (unless visa-exempt) and then be readmitted to the United States as a Q-1 nonimmigrant.[5]

C. Change of Employer
Q-1 nonimmigrants may change employers without leaving the United States. A new employer must file a petition with all required evidence establishing the existence of an international cultural exchange program. The total period of stay in the United States, however, remains limited to 15 months.[6] The beneficiary cannot work for the new employer until USCIS approves the petition and the change of status request.

Part F - Students (F, M)
Chapter 1 - Purpose and Background
A. Purpose
The F and M nonimmigrant visa categories are for noncitizens who seek to study in the United States. The nonimmigrant academic student (F-1) visa category allows a noncitizen to enter the United States as a full-time student at a U.S. college, university, seminary, conservatory, academic high school, private elementary school, other academic institution, or in a language training program.

The nonimmigrant vocational student (M-1) visa category includes students in established vocational or other recognized nonacademic programs but excludes language training programs.

B. Background [Reserved]
C. Legal Authorities
INA 101(a)(15)(F) - Academic student definition

INA 101(a)(15)(M) - Vocational student definition

INA 214(m) - Nonimmigrant elementary and secondary school students

INA 248; 8 CFR 248 - Change of nonimmigrant classification

8 CFR 214.2(f) - Students in colleges, universities, seminaries, conservatories, academic high schools, elementary schools, other academic institutions, and in language training programs

8 CFR 214.2(m) - Students in established vocational or other recognized nonacademic institutions, other than in language training programs


A. General Eligibility for Change of Status to F-1
1. Eligible Nonimmigrants
In general, nonimmigrants who have been lawfully admitted to the United States and maintain the status in which they were admitted (or previously changed to) may seek to change from one visa classification under INA 101(a)(15) to another, with certain restrictions.[1] The applicant must meet all eligibility criteria for the new visa classification.[2]

Generally, a nonimmigrant may apply to change to F-1 status while remaining in the United States if:

The applicant was lawfully admitted to the United States in a nonimmigrant status;

The applicant’s nonimmigrant status remains valid; and

The applicant has not violated the conditions of their nonimmigrant status.[3]

2. Timing and Effective Date
Academic Program Start Date

In general, upon approval of a change of status (COS) to F-1, F-1 students may not engage in any student activities (with certain exceptions)[4] until 30 days before their academic program start date.

Officers grant the COS with an effective date of the applicant’s F-1 status as the day of final adjudication (approval), regardless of whether it falls within 30 days of the academic program start date.

If a COS to F-1 application is approved more than 30 days before the program start date, the nonimmigrant must ensure that they do not violate their F-1 status during that period of time. The student must ensure they maintain status by not engaging in impermissible activities.

For example, engaging in any employment, including on-campus employment and practical training more than 30 days before the program start date, is a violation of F-1 status.[5] In general, F-1 students admitted for duration of status who violate the terms of their status, begin to accrue unlawful presence on the day after USCIS or an immigration judge determines that they have violated their nonimmigrant status.[6]

In all cases, the student must fully comply with all applicable requirements of the Student and Exchange Visitor Program (SEVP).

Duration of Status

Regulations define the nonimmigrant student’s “duration of status” as the time during which an F-1 nonimmigrant is “pursuing a full course of study” at the approved educational institution.[7] USCIS considers the period of time between the approval of the COS to F-1 classification and the F-1 program start date as falling within the provision of “pursuing a full course of study.” This applies if the F-1 student continues to intend to pursue that course of study and does not otherwise violate their F-1 nonimmigrant status.

USCIS considers this period of time between the date of approval and the program start date as similar to the period of time and purpose a student is in the United States during summer vacation in F-1 status (such a break in classes does not interrupt status).

Deferring Program Start Date

If a COS to F-1 application is not approved before the program start date reflected on the initial “Certificate of Eligibility for Nonimmigrant Student Status” (Form I-20), the applicant must request that their Designated School Official (DSO) defer the program start date in the Student and Exchange Visitor Information System (SEVIS) before the current program start date has been reached.

The applicant can monitor the status of their pending COS application and, in accordance with instructions provided on the SEVP website, may contact the DSO if it appears that the program start date may need to be deferred. The applicant and the DSO are responsible for ensuring that the SEVIS record is not terminated while the COS is pending.

Background

USCIS historically only granted applications to change to F-1 status within 30 days of the program start date listed on the applicant’s Form I-20. USCIS required nonimmigrants applying for COS to F-1 classification to continuously obtain nonimmigrant status up to 30 days before the start date of the program of study listed on the Form I-20, even if that required filing an initial extension and later a subsequent extension or extensions, or filing a COS and subsequent extension or extensions. This policy prevented students from incurring a “gap” in status prior to 30 days before the program’s start date, but resulted in the potential filing and adjudication of multiple, duplicative COS or extension of stay (sometimes referred to as “bridging”) applications.

In order to limit costs to applicants and the government, especially during periods of high volume and extended adjudication times, USCIS no longer requires the applicant to submit subsequent applications for extension or change of nonimmigrant status while the COS to F-1 application is pending with USCIS, provided that the applicant’s nonimmigrant status is unexpired at the time of filing the initial COS to F-1 application, and the applicant otherwise remains eligible for a COS.

To avoid a “gap” in status in cases that are adjudicated more than 30 days prior to the academic program start date but are otherwise approvable, USCIS grants the COS to F-1 effective the day USCIS makes a final decision on the COS application, which may in some cases result in a student being granted F-1 status more than 30 days prior to the program start date. 

3. Nonimmigrants Unable to Enroll in a Full Course of Study Seeking Change of Status to F-1 Classification
Certain nonimmigrants, including visitors for business or pleasure (B-1 or B-2), are prohibited from enrolling in a full course of study.[8] Nonimmigrants who wish to enroll in a full course of study but are unable to do so in their current nonimmigrant status must first submit a COS application and request nonimmigrant student (F-1) status. These nonimmigrants must do so while they are still in lawful status.

4. Other Nonimmigrants Seeking Change of Status to F-1 Classification
Some nonimmigrant classifications (PDF) permit applicants to enroll in a full course of study incidental to their primary purpose for being in the United States, while other classifications do not. COS applicants in nonimmigrant classifications that permit such enrollment and who enroll in a full course of study may continue their studies, even if their COS to F-1 is approved more than 30 days before their program start date as listed on their Form I-20.[9]

Nonimmigrants whose classifications do not permit enrolling in a course of study must first acquire F-1 status and may only enroll in a full course of study upon the program start date listed on Form I-20.

When an applicant applies for a COS to F-1 status, the applicant must wait until the COS is approved as well as 30 days before the new program start date before engaging in F status-specific activities (such as on-campus employment and practical training).[10]

5. Travel Abroad and Consular Processing
A nonimmigrant who obtains an F-1 nonimmigrant visa through consular processing may not be admitted more than 30 days before the report date or program start date listed on the Form I-20.[11] If a nonimmigrant travels abroad while their COS application is pending, USCIS considers that COS application abandoned.

If a nonimmigrant student travels abroad after USCIS has approved their F-1 COS application, regulations prohibit re-admission to the United States in F-1 status more than 30 days before the report date or program start date listed on the Form I-20.[12]

6. Dependents (F-2 Nonimmigrants)
Any spouse and minor child(ren) of the student who wishes to change their status to F-2 dependent status must file their COS application while their current nonimmigrant status is valid and unexpired. Officers must review the expiration date of the applicant’s nonimmigrant status as indicated on the applicant’s Arrival/Departure Record (Form I-94) or other relevant document(s) to make this determination.

If USCIS denies the principal nonimmigrant’s COS application, officers must deny any dependent’s COS application as well.

B. Vocational Student (M-1) [Reserved]

Part G - Treaty Traders and Treaty Investors (E-1, E-2)
In May 2020, USCIS retired its Adjudicator’s Field Manual (AFM), a collection of our immigration policies and procedures. We are working quickly to update and incorporate all of the AFM content into the USCIS Policy Manual, the agency’s centralized online repository for immigration policies. Until then, we have moved any remaining AFM content to its corresponding Policy Manual Part. To the extent that a provision in the Policy Manual conflicts with remaining AFM content or Policy Memoranda, the updated information in the Policy Manual prevails. If you have questions or concerns about any discrepancies among these resources, contact USCISPolicyManual@uscis.dhs.gov.

AFM Chapter 34 - Other Employment Authorized Nonimmigrants (E, I & R Classifications) (External) (PDF, 191.62 KB)

Part H - Specialty Occupation Workers (H-1B, E-3)
In May 2020, USCIS retired its Adjudicator’s Field Manual (AFM), a collection of our immigration policies and procedures. We are working quickly to update and incorporate all of the AFM content into the USCIS Policy Manual, the agency’s centralized online repository for immigration policies. Until then, we have moved any remaining AFM content to its corresponding Policy Manual Part. To the extent that a provision in the Policy Manual conflicts with remaining AFM content or Policy Memoranda, the updated information in the Policy Manual prevails. If you have questions or concerns about any discrepancies among these resources, contact USCISPolicyManual@uscis.dhs.gov.

AFM Chapter 30 - Nonimmigrants in General (External) (PDF, 412.67 KB)

AFM Chapter 31 - Petitions for Temporary Workers (H Classifications) (External) (PDF, 798.91 KB)

AFM Chapter 34 - Other Employment Authorized Nonimmigrants (E, I & R Classifications) (External) (PDF, 191.62 KB)

Part I - Temporary Agricultural and Nonagricultural Workers (H-2)
In May 2020, USCIS retired its Adjudicator’s Field Manual (AFM), a collection of our immigration policies and procedures. We are working quickly to update and incorporate all of the AFM content into the USCIS Policy Manual, the agency’s centralized online repository for immigration policies. Until then, we have moved any remaining AFM content to its corresponding Policy Manual Part. To the extent that a provision in the Policy Manual conflicts with remaining AFM content or Policy Memoranda, the updated information in the Policy Manual prevails. If you have questions or concerns about any discrepancies among these resources, contact USCISPolicyManual@uscis.dhs.gov.

AFM Chapter 31 - Petitions for Temporary Workers (H Classifications) (External) (PDF, 798.91 KB)

Chapter 1 - Purpose and Background
A. Purpose
The temporary agricultural worker (H-2A) nonimmigrant visa classification applies to a noncitizen seeking to perform agricultural labor or services of a temporary or seasonal nature in the United States.[1]

The temporary nonagricultural worker (H-2B) nonimmigrant visa classification applies to a noncitizen seeking to perform temporary nonagricultural labor or services in the United States if U.S. workers are not available.[2]

B. Background [Reserved]
C. Legal Authorities
INA 101(a)(15)(H) – Noncitizens coming temporarily to the United States to perform services

8 CFR 214.2(h) – Temporary employees



Chapter 2 - Eligibility for Temporary Agricultural Worker (H-2A) Classification [Reserved]
Chapter 3 - Documentation and Evidence for Temporary Agricultural Worker (H-2A) Classification [Reserved]
Chapter 4 - Adjudication of Temporary Agricultural Worker (H-2A) Petitions [Reserved]
Chapter 5 - Post-Adjudication Issues related to Temporary Agricultural Worker (H-2A) Petitions [Reserved]
Chapter 6 - Temporary Agricultural Worker (H-2A) Petitions Requiring Special Handling [Reserved]
Chapter 7 - Eligibility for Temporary Nonagricultural Worker (H-2B) Classification [Reserved]
Chapter 8 - Documentation and Evidence for Temporary Nonagricultural Worker (H-2B) Classification [Reserved]
Chapter 9 - Adjudication of Temporary Nonagricultural Worker (H-2B) Petitions [Reserved]
Chapter 10 - Post-Adjudication Issues related to Temporary Nonagricultural Worker (H-2B) Petitions [Reserved]
Chapter 11 - Temporary Nonagricultural Worker (H-2B) Petitions Requiring Special Handling
A. Temporary Workers on Guam and in the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands
1. General Eligibility Requirements
Exemption from Statutory Numerical Limitations[1]

The Consolidated Natural Resources Act of 2008 (CNRA)[2] includes a provision exempting H-2B workers performing labor or services on Guam and in the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands (CNMI) from the H-2B numerical limitation (H-2B cap) from November 28, 2009 to December 31, 2014.[3] In 2014, Congress amended the CNRA to extend the transition period until December 31, 2019.[4] In 2018, Congress further extended the Guam and CNMI H-2B and H-1B visa cap exemptions from 2019 to 2029.[5]

The H-2B cap exemption does not apply to any employment to be performed outside of Guam or the CNMI. As such, to qualify for this cap exemption, the petition must include an approved temporary labor certification (TLC) for work locations on Guam or in the CNMI only. An H-2B worker granted H-2B status under this Guam or CNMI cap exemption who ceases to be employed in H-2B classification solely on Guam or in the CNMI is subject to the H-2B cap.

A subsequent petition filed for such an H-2B worker (for example, a change of employer petition with a request for an extension of stay) requesting employment located outside of Guam or the CNMI is also subject to the H-2B cap.

Exemption from H-2B Temporary Need Requirement Under the NDAA

The National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018 (FY 2018 NDAA) created an exemption from the temporary need requirement for certain H-2B workers directly connected to or associated with the military realignment on Guam through September 30, 2023.[6] Following the FY 2018 NDAA, the NDAA for Fiscal Year 2019 (FY 2019 NDAA)[7] took immediate effect on August 13, 2018, and made amendments to the H-2B workers provision as it relates to the temporary need exemption eligibility for H-2B workers on Guam and in the CNMI, including in part:

Extending its effectiveness through December 30, 2023;

Eliminating a previous numerical limitation established by the FY 2018 NDAA by which not more than 4,000 H-2B workers could be admitted annually under the NDAA; and

Providing an initial expansion of the eligible service or labor on Guam or in the CNMI.[8]

Expansion of Eligible Services or Labor under FY 2021 NDAA

The NDAA for Fiscal Year 2021 (FY 2021 NDAA) took immediate effect on January 1, 2021, and provided further expansion of the services or labor eligible under the temporary need exemption.[9] Specifically, the FY 2021 NDAA allows qualified H-2B workers to perform services or labor on Guam or in the CNMI that are either:

Under any agreement entered into by a prime contractor or subcontractor calling for services or labor required for performance of a contract or subcontract for construction, repairs, renovations, or facility services that are directly connected to, supporting, associated with, or adversely affected by, the military realignment occurring on Guam and the CNMI, with priority given to federally funded military projects; or

As a health care worker at a facility that jointly serves members of the U.S. armed forces, dependents, and civilians on Guam or in the CNMI.[10]

An employer who qualifies under the above parameters is not required to demonstrate that the service or labor is temporary in nature if the employment start date is before December 31, 2023. Petitions with employment start dates on or after December 31, 2023 are subject to adjudication under the law and regulations that apply to the H-2B program at that time.

For H-2B petitions for employment on Guam and in the CNMI that do not qualify under the NDAA exemption, USCIS adjudicates the petitions according to existing DHS regulations and policy concerning the H-2B classification.

2. FY 2021 NDAA Exemption Eligibility Involving Military Realignment
H-2B Petition Eligibility Directly Connected to, Supporting, Associated with, or Adversely Affected by the Military Realignment on Guam or in the CNMI

With the exception of health care workers (discussed below), consistent with the FY 2021 NDAA, USCIS requires petitioners requesting the NDAA temporary need exemption to demonstrate that all services or labor to be performed by H-2B nonimmigrants on Guam or in the CNMI are:

Performed as a result of an agreement entered into by a prime contractor or subcontractor;

For services or labor required for performance of a contract or subcontract that is:

For construction, repairs, renovations, or facility services; and

Directly connected to, supporting, associated with, or adversely affected by the military realignment on Guam and in the CNMI.

As required by the FY 2021 NDAA, USCIS gives priority to services or labor performed under a contract or subcontract for federally funded military projects.[11]

The “agreement” may be a “contract or subcontract.” To qualify for the NDAA exemption, any contract or subcontract for labor or services for construction, repairs, renovations, or facility services must be supporting, associated with, directly connected to, or adversely affected by the military realignment. It cannot be only incidentally or tangentially related to the realignment. The claimed relationship to the military realignment, whether directly connected to, associated with, supporting, or adversely affected by, cannot be purely speculative (that is, based on assertions with no documentation to support the claim). If the contract or subcontract includes multiple service or labor projects, all such projects must have at least one of the above-described relationships to the military realignment.

As stated above, while the H-2B temporary need exemption remains limited to contracts or subcontracts for “labor or services for construction, repairs, renovations, or facility services,” the FY 2021 NDAA language extends the previous exemption found in the FY 2019 to include those that are “supporting” or “adversely affected by” the military realignment, in addition to those that are directly connected to or associated with the realignment.

Exemption for Contracts or Subcontracts Supporting, Associated with, or Directly Connected to the Military Realignment

The FY 2021 NDAA’s addition of the term “supporting” to the terms “associated with” and “directly connected to” clarifies and emphasizes that the exemption may be granted with respect to agreements covering certain projects for construction, repairs, renovations, or facility services that do not have a specific contract or agreement with the military provided they have a non-speculative supporting relationship, association with, or direct connection to the military realignment.

The FY 2021 NDAA’s H-2B provision may apply, for example, to H-2B workers performing construction, repairs, renovations, or facility services or labor at a civilian parking garage, where evidence is presented that the garage was built near a U.S. military base specifically to accommodate increased parking demands related to military realignment projects, even though it is not likely directly connected to or associated with the military realignment. In such an instance, the performance of such services or labor may be considered to support the military realignment.

Conversely, a petitioner for labor or services performed at a civilian parking garage built to accommodate customers at local retail establishments may not be able to show a supporting relationship to the military realignment based solely on a claim that some of those retail customers could include military personnel. In this case, the claimed relationship between the labor or services and the military realignment could be considered incidental or tangential, even if there is a likelihood that some persons engaged in the military realignment project would, on a small island like Guam, use the parking garage on occasion.

Infrastructure improvements, such as utility or transportation systems, are likely to qualify for employment of H-2B workers under the NDAA exemption. In such cases, the petitioner must establish through presentation of facts and submission of supporting documentation that the contract or subcontract for such labor or services supports the military realignment on Guam or in the CNMI, given the small geographic areas of Guam and the CNMI and the inherent need for integrated utility and transportation system on the islands. This is the case even if the contract or subcontract for such improvements is not directly with the U.S. military.

Exemption for Contracts or Subcontracts Adversely Affected by the Military Realignment

The FY 2021 NDAA further extends the exemption to include contracts or subcontracts for labor or services for construction, repairs, renovations, or facility services that are “adversely affected by” the military realignment, in addition to those that are supporting, associated with, or directly connected to the realignment. 

Contracts or subcontracts that are “adversely affected by” the military realignment might include projects for which the military realignment has caused a loss of business income or a negative impact on the availability of necessary labor or resources that is not purely speculative (that is, based on assertions with no documentation to support the claim).

For example, if a construction company provides a detailed attestation or other evidence establishing that several welders from its permanent staff have left the company to take positions on the military base and that, as a result, its contracts have been delayed or cancelled, this may demonstrate a nonspeculative adverse effect.

On the other hand, if a restaurant generally asserts that its inability to find workers necessary to undertake its current contracts or fulfill new contracts or subcontracts relates to the military realignment and provides only its TLC from Guam Department of Labor (Guam DOL) and a copy of a broad study about the effect of the realignment on the Guam labor market, this may not be sufficient to demonstrate an adverse effect on the petitioner by the military realignment.

Eligibility for NDAA Exemption Must Involve Military Realignment Occurring on Guam and CNMI

Under the FY 2021 NDAA, to qualify for the NDAA exemption, the direct connection, support, association, or adverse effect cannot relate to just any military activity on Guam or in the CNMI; it must be with “the military realignment occurring on Guam and the [CNMI].”[12]

The term “military realignment” refers generally to the planned realignment of U.S. Marines from Okinawa, Japan to Guam, as well as other U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) force structure realignment in the Indo-Pacific region involving Guam and the CNMI stemming from DOD Records of Decision occurring in 2010 and 2015.

Guam has a long-established U.S. military presence (including U.S. Air Force and U.S. Navy bases) that predates this military realignment, including ongoing activities that are not related to the military realignment, and therefore would not be covered by the NDAA.

While some military activity on Guam or in the CNMI that is not specifically related to the U.S. Marines may come under the term “the military realignment,” distinguishing U.S. military activity that is “the realignment” as compared to other military activity on Guam or in the CNMI may be complex for USCIS officers.

The distinction essentially requires a determination of general military function, and the broader strategic goal supported by a particular contract or subcontract is unlikely to be evident from the contract documents themselves. As such, input from the DOD is particularly important to support petitions claiming eligibility as supporting, associated with, or directly connected to the military realignment, as further described below.[13]

3. NDAA Exemption Eligibility for Health Care Workers
For health care workers, consistent with the FY 2021 NDAA, USCIS requires petitioners requesting the NDAA temporary need exemption to demonstrate that all services or labor to be performed by H-2B nonimmigrants on Guam or in the CNMI are:

As a health care worker (such as a nurse, physician assistant, or allied health professional), but excluding graduates of medical schools coming to Guam or the CNMI to perform service or labor as members of the medical profession;[14] and

At a facility that jointly serves members of the U.S. armed forces, dependents, and civilians on Guam or in the CNMI.

4. Documentation and Evidence
All petitioners that request their cases to be considered for eligibility under the NDAA H-2B temporary need exemption should submit a cover sheet indicating “NDAA Eligible” in large, bold letters along with their H-2B petition to facilitate efficient adjudication.

In addition, USCIS suggests petitioners submit the following documentation, if applicable.

If claiming eligibility directly connected to, supporting, or associated with the military realignment, petitioners should submit:

A copy of any applicable agreement, contract, or subcontract for services or labor for construction, repairs, renovations, or facility services or other probative evidence that each requested H-2B position meets the requirement that the worker will perform services or labor on Guam or in the CNMI;[15]

A signed statement from an official within the DOD (including a branch of the U.S. armed forces) providing the DOD view regarding whether the applicable agreement, contract, or subcontract is directly connected to, supporting, or associated with the military realignment. The DOD statement may also explain that the services or labor are performed under a federally funded agreement, if applicable. If this DOD statement is not provided, the petitioner should establish why it could not be obtained; and

Any other relevant documentation demonstrating that services or labor will be performed under a federally funded agreement to support priority consideration of NDAA eligibility, if applicable, if that information is not included in the DOD statement.

If claiming eligibility due to an adverse effect related to the military realignment on Guam and in the CNMI, the petitioner should submit:

A copy of any applicable agreement, contract, or subcontract for services or labor for construction, repairs, renovations, or facility services, as well as other probative evidence that each requested H-2B position meets the requirement that the worker will perform services or labor on Guam or in the CNMI; and

A detailed explanation, accompanied by any relevant supporting evidence, regarding the adverse effect of the military realignment.[16] USCIS may consider any relevant documentation to show such effect, including but not limited to a detailed attestation articulating a nonspeculative relationship between the military realignment and the claimed adverse effect. While an approved TLC is sufficient to show a general shortage of available and qualified U.S. workers on Guam (or in the CNMI), USCIS does not consider it sufficient to demonstrate that the military realignment occurring on Guam and in the CNMI has adversely affected the petitioner.  

If claiming eligibility for healthcare workers, the petitioner should submit:

A signed statement on company letterhead from a corporate officer or facility administrator having authority to speak on behalf of the company or facility providing its TRICARE or other applicable provider number and attesting to the fact that it jointly serves members of the U.S. armed forces, dependents, and civilians. The statement should, to the extent possible, also include the number of members of the U.S. armed forces, dependents, and civilians on Guam or in the CNMI that the petitioning facility has served in the preceding 12 months. USCIS uses this information to evaluate the use of the NDAA provision.
USCIS recognizes the limitations imposed upon health care facilities by patient confidentiality restrictions. Accordingly, USCIS does not expect and does not generally request that a petitioner submit facility records that would support that it is jointly serving members of the U.S. armed forces, dependents, and civilians on Guam or in the CNMI.

5. Adjudication
Petitioners bear the burden of establishing eligibility for the NDAA exemption.[17] USCIS officers determine whether the petitioner has met its burden of demonstrating eligibility under the NDAA based on the totality of the evidence. When applicable, officers should give appropriate weight to the signed statement from the DOD, particularly with respect to determining the relationship between the services or labor and the military realignment, as opposed to other U.S. military activity. However, such statement is not determinative.

Under the FY 2021 NDAA, priority is given to contracts or subcontracts for services or labor for federally funded projects directly connected to, supporting, or associated with the military realignment on Guam and in the CNMI.[18]

Accordingly, a petition demonstrating that the applicable services or labor are performed under a federally funded agreement, contract, or subcontract has made a prima facie case that it qualifies for the NDAA exemption. This means that USCIS may accept, without any further evidence or inquiry, that the petitioner has established eligibility under the NDAA and is exempted from showing temporary need.

USCIS officers, however, still must determine whether the petition meets other H-2B requirements, such as an H-2B worker’s eligibility for H-2B status, and in their discretion, may request additional evidence that the petition qualifies for the NDAA exemption.

If the USCIS officer determines that the case does not meet the NDAA exemption, then he or she should adjudicate the petition under existing H-2B policy and regulations, including the requirement that the petitioner establish temporary need.

For cases meeting the NDAA exemption regarding H-2B petitions for workers on Guam or in the CNMI, USCIS officers do not perform an analysis of whether the need for the H-2B position is temporary under otherwise applicable law and regulations.

USCIS officers, however, continue routine case processing, including reviewing whether the petition includes an approved TLC issued by the U.S. Department of Labor (DOL) or Guam DOL, as appropriate.[19] As provided by DHS regulations, DOL or Guam DOL may approve a TLC for a period of up to 1 year, with the possibility for extension, for H-2B employment on  Guam or in the CNMI, respectively.[20]

6. Decision
If the officer determines that the petitioner has provided sufficient evidence to show that the beneficiary meets the applicable eligibility requirements, the officer should approve the petition. Otherwise, the officer should request additional evidence or deny the petition.[21] If USCIS denies a petition, the petitioner may appeal the decision to the USCIS Administrative Appeals Office.

Period of Admission for H-2B Workers on Guam or in the CNMI Under the NDAA

Before December 31, 2023,[22] an H-2B worker whose services or labor meets the NDAA exemption may be admitted for a consecutive period of up to 3 years, depending on the specific need stated in the H-2B petition.[23] Thereafter, he or she may again apply for admission under the NDAA exemption or as an H-2B worker in general after residing and being physically present outside the United States for the immediately preceding 3 months.[24]

Because the provisions of the NDAA end on December 30, 2023, petitions with employment start dates on or after December 31, 2023 are subject to adjudication under the law and regulations that apply to the H-2B program at that time.

B. Reserved

Part J - Trainees (H-3)
In May 2020, USCIS retired its Adjudicator’s Field Manual (AFM), a collection of our immigration policies and procedures. We are working quickly to update and incorporate all of the AFM content into the USCIS Policy Manual, the agency’s centralized online repository for immigration policies. Until then, we have moved any remaining AFM content to its corresponding Policy Manual Part. To the extent that a provision in the Policy Manual conflicts with remaining AFM content or Policy Memoranda, the updated information in the Policy Manual prevails. If you have questions or concerns about any discrepancies among these resources, contact USCISPolicyManual@uscis.dhs.gov.

AFM Chapter 31 - Petitions for Temporary Workers (H Classifications) (External) (PDF, 798.91 KB)

Chapter 1 - Purpose and Background
A. Purpose
The H-3 nonimmigrant visa category allows noncitizens to come temporarily to the United States as either a:

Trainee who seeks to enter the United States at the invitation of an organization or person to receive training in any field of endeavor, other than graduate medical education or training;[1]or​

Special Education Exchange Visitor who seeks to participate in a structured special education exchange visitor training program that provides for practical training and experience in the education of children with physical, mental, or emotional disabilities.[2]

The H-3 nonimmigrant classification is not intended for productive employment. Rather, the H-3 program is designed to provide a person with job-related training that is not available in his or her country for work that will ultimately be performed outside the United States.

B. Background
The Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) of 1952 contained the precursor to today’s H-3 nonimmigrant classification: “an alien having a residence in a foreign country which he has no intention of abandoning . . . who is coming temporarily to the United States as an industrial trainee[.]”[3] 

In 1970, Congress expanded the class of noncitizens eligible for nonimmigrant classification by deleting the word “industrial” as a modifier of “trainee” in the statute.[4] However, Congress narrowed the H-3 classification in 1976 by inserting the following language into the statute: “other than to receive graduate medical education or training[.]”[5] 

Finally, the Immigration Act of 1990[6] both limited and expanded the H-3 classification. Congress limited the H-3 nonimmigrant classification by adding the following language to the statute: “in a training program that is not designed primarily to provide productive employment[.]”[7] However, Congress indirectly expanded the classification by creating the Special Education Exchange Visitor Program,[8] which the legacy Immigration and Naturalization Service placed within the H-3 category.[9] Congress has not amended the statute since 1990.[10] 



Chapter 2 - H-3 Categories
A. Trainees[1]
H-3 trainees are noncitizens who have been invited to participate in a training program in the United States by a person, a business, or an organization. The training must be unavailable in the person’s home country. There are no numerical limits on the number of people who can be granted H-3 visas as trainees each year. 

An H-3 trainee cannot engage in productive employment in the United States unless such work is incidental and necessary to the training and must not be placed in a position which is in the petitioning entity’s normal operation and in which citizens and resident workers are regularly employed. Finally, the training must benefit the person pursuing a career outside the United States.

An H-3 trainee must be invited by a person or organization for the purpose of receiving training (except as a physician), in any field including:

A purely industrial establishment​

Agriculture​

Commerce ​

Communications​

Finance​

Government​

Transportation​

Other professions[2]

1. Externs[3]
A hospital approved by the American Medical Association (AMA) or the American Osteopathic Association (AOA) for either an internship or residency program may petition to classify a medical student attending a medical school abroad as an H-3 trainee if the student’s training will be done as an extern during his or her medical school vacation. The hospital must also satisfy the H-3 trainee petition requirements. 

2. Nurses[4] ​
A petitioner may seek H-3 classification for a nurse if:

The nurse-beneficiary does not have H-1 status; ​

Such training is designed to benefit both the nurse-beneficiary and the overseas employer upon the nurse’s return to his or her country of origin; and​

The petitioner establishes that there is a genuine need for the nurse-beneficiary to receive a brief period of training that is unavailable in his or her native country. 

Additionally, the petitioner must:[5] 

Satisfy the H-3 trainee requirements;

Establish that the nurse-beneficiary has a full and unrestricted license to practice professional nursing in the country where the beneficiary obtained a nursing education[6] or that such education was obtained in the United States or Canada;[7] and

Include a statement certifying that the nurse-beneficiary is fully qualified under the laws governing the place where the training will be received and that under those laws the petitioner is authorized to give the beneficiary the desired training.[8]

B. Special Education Exchange Visitors[9]
H-3 special education exchange visitors are participants in a structured special education program that provides practical training and experience in the education of physically, mentally, or emotionally disabled children. This category is limited to an 18-month period of stay and to 50 visas per fiscal year. [10] 


Chapter 3 - Trainee Program Requirements
A. Training Program Conditions
An H-3 petitioner is required to submit evidence demonstrating that:[1] 

The proposed training is not available in the trainee’s own country;​

The trainee will not be placed in a position that is in the normal operation of the business and in which United States citizen and resident workers are regularly employed;​

The trainee will not engage in productive employment unless it is incidental and necessary to the training; and

The training will benefit the trainee in pursuing a career outside the United States.[2]

B. Training Program Description
Each petition for a trainee must include a statement which:[3]​

Describes the type of training and supervision to be given, and the structure of the training program;​

Sets forth the proportion of time that will be devoted to productive employment;​

Shows the number of hours that will be spent, respectively, in classroom instruction and in on-the-job training;​

Describes the career abroad for which the training will prepare the nonimmigrant;​

Indicates the reasons why such training cannot be obtained in the trainee’s country and why it is necessary for the person to be trained in the United States; and​

Indicates the source of any remuneration received by the trainee and any benefit which will accrue to the petitioner for providing the training.[4] 

C. Training Program Restrictions
A training program for a trainee may not be approved if it: [5] ​

Deals in generalities with no fixed schedule, objectives, or means of evaluation;​

Is incompatible with the nature of the petitioner’s business or enterprise;

Is on behalf of a trainee who already possesses substantial training and expertise in the proposed field of training;[6] 

Is in a field in which it is unlikely that the knowledge or skill will be used outside the United States;​

Will result in productive employment beyond that which is incidental and necessary to the training;​

Is designed to recruit and train nonimmigrants for the ultimate staffing of domestic operations in the United States;​

Does not establish that the petitioner has the physical plant and sufficiently trained workforce to provide the training specified; or​

Is designed to extend the total allowable period of practical training previously authorized a nonimmigrant student.[7] 

D. Filing
The petitioner files the H-3 petition on the Petition for a Nonimmigrant Worker (Form I-129). Multiple trainees may be requested on a single petition if the trainees will be receiving the same training for the same period of time and in the same location.[8] 

Officers will review each piece of evidence for relevance, probative value, and credibility to determine whether the petitioner submitted sufficient evidence establishing that the petition is approvable.[9] The table below serves as a quick, non-exhaustive reference guide listing the forms and evidence required when filing a petition for an H-3 trainee.

Trainee (H-3) Petition Forms and Documentation

Petition for a Nonimmigrant Worker (Form I-129), Including H supplement

If the beneficiary is outside the United States, a copy of his or her passport 

Application To Extend/Change Nonimmigrant Status (Form I-539) for dependents of an H-3 who are also in the U.S. dependents should fill out and sign this form, not the petitioner for the H-3 beneficiary (one Form I-539 and fee covers all dependents)

Copies of each dependent’s I-94 or other proof of lawful immigration status and proof of the family relationship with the primary H-3 beneficiary (such as marriage and birth certificates)

Notice of Entry of Appearance as Attorney or Accredited Representative (Form G-28) (if applicable)

All Trainees Except Special Education Exchange Visitors Must Provide:

A detailed written statement from the petitioner containing:

The overall schedule, including the type of training and supervision;

The structure of the training program;

The number of hours per week which will involve productive employment, if any;

The number of hours per week in classroom study; 

The number of hours per week in on-the-job training;

What skills the beneficiary will acquire (and how these skills relate to pursuing a career abroad); and

The source of any remuneration.

Evidence that the beneficiary will not be placed in a position which, in the normal operation of the business, U.S. citizen and resident workers are regularly employed.

Proof that the petitioner has the physical facility and sufficiently trained staff to provide the training described in the petition.

An explanation from the petitioner regarding benefits it will obtain by providing the training, including why it is willing to incur the cost of the training. 

An explanation as to why the training must take place in the United States, instead of in the beneficiary’s country along with evidence that similar training is not available in beneficiary’s home country.

A summary of the beneficiary’s prior relevant training and experience, such as diplomas and letters from past employers.

If the beneficiary is a nonimmigrant student, evidence that the proposed training was not designed to extend the total allowable period of practical training. 

Petitioners seeking H-3 status for a nurse must also provide proof: 

That the beneficiary has a full and unrestricted nursing license to work in the country where his or her nursing education was obtained, or 

That the education took place in the United States or Canada. 

In addition, petitioners seeking H-3 status for a nurse must also include a statement certifying:

That the beneficiary is qualified under the laws governing the place where the training will be received; 

That under those laws the petitioner is authorized to provide the training; 

That there is a genuine need for the nurse to receive the training;

That the training is designed to benefit the beneficiary upon returning to his or her country of origin; and

That the training is designed to benefit the beneficiary’s overseas employer.

Hospitals petitioning for externs must also:

Provide proof that the hospital has been approved by the American Medical Association (AMA) or the American Osteopathic Association (AOA) for either an internship or residence program, and

Provide proof that the extern is currently attending medical school abroad.

If Requesting Premium Processing:

Request for Premium Processing Service (Form I-907) (see USCIS website for current fees) 

The standard of proof applied in most USCIS adjudications, including H-3 petitions, and administrative immigration proceedings is the “preponderance of the evidence” standard. Therefore, if the petitioner submits relevant, probative, and credible evidence that leads USCIS to believe that the claim is “probably true” or “more likely than not,” the applicant or petitioner has satisfied the standard of proof. See U.S. v. Cardozo-Fonesca, 480 U.S. 421 (1987) (defining “more likely than not” as a greater than 50 percent probability of something occurring). If the officer can articulate a material doubt, it is appropriate for the officer to either request additional evidence or, if that doubt leads the officer to believe that the claim is probably not true, deny the application or petition. See Matter of Chawathe, 25 I&N Dec. 369, 376 (AAO 2010) (citing Matter of E-M, 20 I&N Dec. 77, 79-80 (Comm. 1989)).

Chapter 4 - Special Education Exchange Visitor Program Requirements
There are requirements for H-3 petitions involving special education exchange visitors that are distinct from H-3 trainees. [1] An H-3 beneficiary in a special education training program must be coming to the United States to participate in a structured program which provides for practical training and experience in the education of children with physical, mental, or emotional disabilities. No more than 50 visas may be approved in a fiscal year, [2] and participants may remain in the United States for no more than 18 months. [3]

The petition must be filed by a facility which has: a professionally trained staff; and a structured program for providing:​

Education to children with disabilities; and

Training and hands-on experience to participants in the special education exchange visitor program. [4]

The petition should include a description of:​

The training the applicant will receive;​

The facility’s professional staff; and​

The beneficiary’s participation in the training program. [5]

In addition, the petition must show that the special education exchange visitor:​

Is nearing the completion of a baccalaureate or higher degree program in special education;​

Has already earned a baccalaureate or higher degree in special education; or

Has extensive prior training and experience teaching children with physical, mental, or emotional disabilities. [6]

Any custodial care of children must be incidental to the beneficiary’s training.

Officers review each piece of evidence for relevance, probative value, and credibility to determine whether the petitioner submitted sufficient evidence establishing that the petition is approvable. [7] The table below serves as a quick, non-exhaustive, reference guide listing the forms and evidence required when filing a petition for an H-3 special education exchange visitor.

Special Education Exchange Visitor H-3 Petition Forms and Documentation

Petition for a Nonimmigrant Worker (Form I-129), Including H supplement

If the beneficiary is in the United States, a copy of the I-94 or other proof of current lawful, unexpired immigration status (Note that Canadians who enter as a B-1 or a B-2 will not typically have an I-94)

Filing fee; see USCIS’ website for current fees

Application To Extend/Change Nonimmigrant Status (Form I-539) for dependents of an H-3 who are also in the U.S. dependents should fill out and sign this form, not the petitioner for the H-3 beneficiary (one Form I-539 and fee covers all dependents)

Copies of each dependent’s I-94 or other proof of lawful immigration status and proof of the family relationship with the primary H-3 beneficiary (such as marriage and birth certificates)

Notice of Entry of Appearance as Attorney or Accredited Representative (Form G-28) (if applicable)

A copy of his or her passport, if the beneficiary is outside the United States

A description of the structured training program for providing education to children with disabilities and for providing hands-on experience to participants in the special education program, including noting the professionally trained staff, facilities, and how the exchange visitor will participate in the program

Evidence that any custodial care of children will be incidental to the training program

Evidence that participant has nearly completed a baccalaureate or higher degree in special education, already has a baccalaureate degree or higher degree in special education, or has extensive prior training and experience in teaching children with disabilities

If Requesting Premium Processing:

Request for Premium Processing Service (Form I-907) (see USCIS’ website for current fees)

The standard of proof applied in most USCIS adjudications, including H-3 petitions, and administrative immigration proceedings is the “preponderance of the evidence” standard.

Chapter 5 - Family Members of H-3 Beneficiaries
An H-3 nonimmigrant’s spouse and unmarried minor children may accompany the H-3 nonimmigrant to the United States as H-4 nonimmigrants. H-4 dependents of H-3 nonimmigrants are not permitted to work in the United States. [1] 


Chapter 6 - Adjudication
A. Adjudicative Issues
Officers must carefully review each petition for an H-3 trainee to ensure compliance with the intent of the H-3 category to train those who will return to their home countries. Unless specifically provided otherwise, officers should apply a “preponderance of the evidence” standard when evaluating eligibility for the benefit sought.[1] The burden of proving eligibility for the benefit sought rests entirely with the petitioner.[2] 

B. Factors to Consider
1. Career Abroad
The description of the training program should include a specific explanation of the position and duties for which the training will prepare the trainee.[3] The trainee must demonstrate that the proposed training will prepare the beneficiary for an existing career outside the United States.

Trainings can be to prepare the trainee for something that is new and unavailable anywhere in the trainee’s country. For instance, a trainee may already be a professional in his or her own right and possess knowledge in the field of proposed training, but will be using the training to further his or her skills or career through company-specific training that a corporate organization makes available in the United States. This could include cases of mid-level and senior-level employees who possess knowledge in their field, but seek to further develop their skills in the proposed field of training.[4] As always, the totality of the evidence is evaluated for each case and all other requirements must be met.[5]

Example: A U.S. company develops a new product for which training is unavailable in another country. The U.S. company may petition to train people to use that product, which will enable the trainees to train others to use the new product in their home country.

2. Instruction
Classroom-based Instruction

In cases where the program is entirely classroom-based, officers should review the evidence to ensure that the petitioner establishes by a preponderance of the evidence that the training cannot be made available in the beneficiary’s home country.[6]

If a petitioner claims that the classroom training portion of their proposed training programs will take place online, the petition must provide an explanation as to why the training cannot take place in the beneficiary’s own country. Officers should also investigate whether the online training would be provided by an academic or vocational institution.[7]

Online Instruction

In cases where the program is entirely online, officers must review each case and ensure that the petitioner has met their burden of proof (preponderance of the evidence) demonstrating that the training cannot be made available in the beneficiary’s home country.[8] 

3. Description of the Training Program
The petitioner must specify the type of training, the level of supervision, and the structure of the training program.[9] The petitioner should provide the officer with sufficient information to establish what the beneficiary will actually be doing, and should link the various tasks to specific skills that the beneficiary will gain by performing them.​

On-The-Job Training Hours

The petitioner must specify the number of hours both supervised and unsupervised.[10] The unsupervised work should be minimal and the supervised work should always be oriented toward training. 

Shadowing

There are limited circumstances where a proposed training program that consists largely or entirely of on-the-job training may be approved. Officers should carefully evaluate the totality of the evidence against a preponderance of the evidence standard, including whether a U.S. worker is being displaced and if the on-the-job training would allow the trainee to be placed into a position which is in the normal operation of the business and in which U.S. citizens and legal residents are regularly employed.[11] 

4. Remuneration
The petitioner must indicate the source of remuneration received by the trainee, and explain any training program benefits accrued by the petitioning company.[12] Remuneration may come from any source, domestic or international. When assessing remuneration, the officer may consider whether the salary is in proportion to the training position.[13] 

5. Placement into Normal Operation of Business[14]
Officers should consider whether the beneficiary will be placed in a position which is in the normal operations of the business, and U.S. citizens and residents are regularly employed. Factors to consider include:

Whether training that familiarizes the beneficiary with the individual operations of the petitioning company is similar to the training that would be expected of any new employee,

Indications that the beneficiary may remain in the United States working with the petitioner, and 

Training where the beneficiary is trained alongside U.S. workers.[15]

6. Practical Training
Petitioners frequently assert that beneficiaries will spend a certain amount of time in “practical training.” This assertion needs to be supported with a clear explanation of the type and degree of supervision that the beneficiary will receive during such periods.[16] If the officer determines that the “practical training” would actually be productive employment, then the petitioner must establish that it would be incidental to and necessary to the training.[17]

7. Productive Employment
The proportion of time that will be devoted to productive employment must be specified.[18] Productive employment should be minimal because the beneficiary should be training and not performing productive work that displaces U.S. citizens or legal residents.[19] A training program which devotes a significant percentage of time to productive employment should be closely scrutinized.[20]

8. Substantial Training and Expertise in Field of Training
In order to establish that the beneficiary does not already possess substantial training and expertise in the proposed field of training,[21] the petitioner should submit as much information regarding the beneficiary’s credentials as possible. If related to the proposed H-3 training program, copies of the beneficiary’s diplomas and transcripts should be submitted, including any training and education received in the United States, copies of any relevant forms (for example, Certificate of Eligibility for Nonimmigrant (F-1) Student Status-For Academic and Language Students (Form I-20), Certificate of Eligibility for Exchange Visitor (J-1) Status(Form DS-2019)). If possible, letters from prior employers detailing the beneficiary’s work experience should also be submitted. 

9. Sufficiently Trained Staff
In order to establish that it has sufficiently trained staff to provide the training specified in the petition,[22] the petitioner should provide the names and credentials of the persons who will provide the training. The petitioner should specify the amount of time each trainer will spend training the beneficiary. The petitioner should also explain how the trainers’ normal responsibilities will be performed while they are training the beneficiary (this is especially important in cases involving relatively small entities, as larger percentages of their workforces will presumably be diverted in order to provide the training).[23]

10. Unavailability of the Training in Beneficiary’s Country
The petitioner must establish that the trainee cannot obtain the training in his or her country and demonstrate why it is necessary for the trainee to be trained in the United States.[24]

C. Approvals
If all documentary requirements have been met and the petition appears approvable, officers should endorse the action block on the petition. The approval period should coincide with the period of training requested by the petitioner, but only up to 2 years for trainees and up to 18 months for special education training program participants.[25]

When approving a special education training program participant, officers need to enter H-3B in CLAIMS and annotate H-3B on the petition. Because of the numerical limitations applicable to the H-3 Special Education Exchange Visitor category, officers must contact the USCIS Service Center Operations office to obtain authorization before approving an H-3 Special Education Exchange Visitor petition. The number assigned should be recorded on the front of the petition in the "Remarks" section. The approved petition should also be annotated "Approved Pursuant to Sec. 223 of Pub. L. 101-649.” 

D. Denials
If documentary requirements have not been met and the petition is not approvable, officers should prepare and issue a notice of denial and advise the petitioner of the right of appeal to the Administrative Appeals Office. 

E. Transmittal of Petitions
USCIS sends all approved petitions to the Kentucky Consular Center (KCC). The KCC scans and uploads the documentation into the Consular Consolidated Database (CCD).[26] Consular officers and Customs and Border Protection officers have access to the CCD to verify and review documents. 

Chapter 7 - Admissions, Extensions of Stay, and Change of Status
A. Admissions
H-3 trainees and externs should be admitted for the length of the training program, but for no longer than 2 years.[1] H-3 visa special education exchange visitors should be admitted for the length of the training program, but for no longer than 18 months. 

H-3 trainees and special education exchange visitors who respectively, have spent 2 years or 18 months in the United States, in either H-visa or L-visa classifications may not seek extension of, change of status to, or be readmitted in, either H-visa or L-visa status unless they have resided outside the United States for the previous six months.[2]

There are limited exceptions to this rule. For example, the limitation does not apply to an H-3 nonimmigrant whose H or L status was seasonal, intermittent, or lasted for an aggregate of 6 months or less per year.[3]

Additionally, time spent as an H-4 dependent does not count against the maximum allowable periods of stay available to principals in H-3 status (or vice-versa). Thus, a person who was previously granted H-4 dependent status and subsequently is granted H-3 classification, or a person who was previously granted H-3 classification and subsequently is granted H-4 dependent status, may be eligible to remain in the United States for the maximum period of stay applicable to the classification. 

For example, a husband and wife who come to the United States as a principal H-3 and dependent H-4 spouse may maintain status for one year, and then change status to H-4 and H-3 respectively, as long as the change of status application is properly filed before the principal H-3 has spent the maximum allowable period of stay in the United States.[4]

B. Extensions of Stay
H-3 trainees and externs can only extend their stay if their original stay was less than 2 years, and the total period of stay, together with the extension period, does not exceed 2 years. H-3 special education exchange visitors can extend their stay in the United States only if their total period of stay does not exceed 18 months.[5]

To file for an extension, the petitioner must file another Petition for a Nonimmigrant Worker (Form I-129) and H Classification Supplement to Form I-129, fully documented in the same manner as the first petition, and also include:​

A letter from the petitioner requesting an extension of status for the trainee, with an explanation of why the training has not yet been completed;

​A copy of the beneficiary’s Arrival/Departure Record (Form I-94); and

​A copy of the beneficiary’s first Notice of Action (Form I-797).

If the H-3 beneficiary has a dependent (a spouse, or unmarried child under the age of 21) in the United States, those dependents will need to submit an Application To Extend/Change Nonimmigrant Status (Form I-539). 

C. Change of Status
Certain categories of nonimmigrants are eligible to change status to that of an H-3 nonimmigrant, including certain students and other temporary visa holders.[6] Such change of status requests must establish that:​

The beneficiaries entered the United States legally;​

The beneficiaries have never worked in the United States illegally, or otherwise violated the terms of their visa; and​

The expiration date on the beneficiary’s I-94 has not passed.[7]

Part K - Media Representatives (I)
Chapter 1 - Purpose and Background
A. Purpose
The foreign information media representative nonimmigrant visa classification, commonly known as the “I” visa category, is intended to be used by representatives of the foreign media, including members of the following industries: 

Press;

Radio;

Film; and

Print. 

In addition, certain employees of independent production companies may also be eligible for a foreign information media representative visa classification under certain conditions. 

B. Background
The foreign information media representative visa classification was created by the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) of 1952[1] in order to facilitate the exchange of information among nations. Foreign information media representatives do not require a visa petition approved by USCIS. Consular officers with the U.S. Department of State primarily adjudicate benefit requests for foreign information media representatives during the nonimmigrant visa application process. USCIS generally only receives a request for this visa classification when a nonimmigrant applies for a change of status or an extension of stay as a foreign information media representative. 

C. Legal Authorities
INA 101(a)(15)(I) – Representatives of foreign media

8 CFR 214.2(i) – Representatives of information media

Chapter 2 - Eligibility
A foreign media representative is a noncitizen who:

Is a bona fide representative of the foreign press, radio, film, or other foreign information media;​

Has a home office in a foreign country whose government grants reciprocity for similar privileges to representatives with home offices in the United States; and​

Seeks to enter or remain in the United States solely to engage in such a vocation.[1]

Noncitizens who meet the above definition may be eligible for classification as a foreign information media representative. Foreign information media representative nonimmigrants are admitted for the duration of their employment with the same foreign media organization in the same information medium. Foreign information media representatives must obtain authorization from USCIS to change employers or work in a different medium.[2]

Independent Production Companies[3]

Employees of independent production companies may also be eligible for foreign information media representative nonimmigrant status if, in addition to the above:

The employee holds a credential issued by a professional journalistic association; 

The film or video footage produced will be used by a foreign-based television station or other media to disseminate information or news to a foreign audience; and 

The film or video footage will not be used primarily for a commercial entertainment or advertising purpose.

Chapter 3 - Distinction between News and Entertainment
A. Entertainment and Advertising
Camera persons and other workers engaged in producing films for entertainment or advertising purposes do not qualify under the foreign information media representative visa classification and should seek another visa classification for which they may qualify. For example, a noncitizen intending to work on entertainment-oriented materials may be better suited to apply for nonimmigrant status on the basis of extraordinary ability or achievement; as an entertainer; or, if applicable, on the basis of providing essential support to certain O or P nonimmigrants.[1]

Even if a camera person or other workers receive no payment from sources in the United States and the film or video footage produced is solely for foreign distribution as entertainment or advertisement, applicants under such circumstances may not qualify under the foreign information media representative visa classification. 

B. Nonfiction Documentaries
Increasingly, because of the growing popularity of documentary-type biographies and similar nonfiction film productions, the distinction between commercial filmmaking for entertainment and genuine news gathering is less clear. For example, filmed biographies may be regarded as documentary filmmaking or as news gathering. In adjudicating such cases, the officer should consider whether the intended use is journalistic, informational, or educational, as opposed to entertainment. The officer should also consider the foreign distribution of the film or video footage in addition to other factors, including the timeliness of the project relative to the subject event.

C. Intended Use
An officer should examine the type of organization that employs the foreign information media representative and the proposed foreign distribution of the film or other produced material. Applicants should not use the foreign information media representative visa classification as a way of avoiding mandatory consultation required to obtain visa classification on the basis of extraordinary ability or achievement or as an entertainer.[2]

Chapter 4 - Family Members
A foreign information media representative’s spouse and unmarried children (under age 21) may accompany the foreign media representative and be admitted under the “I” nonimmigrant visa classification.[1] If approved, such dependents may attend school in the United States without changing to F-1 nonimmigrant student status. However, the dependents are not authorized to work in the United States while in the foreign information media representative dependent status. 

Chapter 5 - Adjudication
A. Extension of Stay or Change of Status
USCIS officers may receive an application for a change of status to that of a foreign information media representative nonimmigrant, or a request from a foreign information media representative nonimmigrant to change employers or information medium.

The applicant applies for a change of status or extension of stay by filing an Application To Extend/Change Nonimmigrant Status (Form I-539) together with evidence of current status and evidence from the employing media organization describing the employment and establishing that the applicant is a bona fide representative of that foreign media organization.

When reviewing a Form I-539 application involving a foreign information media representative, the officer must ensure the applicant:

Meets or continues to meet all the eligibility requirements for the foreign information media representative visa classification;

Is admissible to the United States;[1] and

Has not violated any terms or conditions of his or her current nonimmigrant status.[2]

B. Approvals
If the applicant properly filed the Form I-539 application, meets all the eligibility requirements, and satisfies all the admission requirements, the officer may approve the application.

The table below provides a list of the classifications for foreign information media representatives. The code of admission is “I-1” for all eligible classes of applicants.

Classes of Applicants and Corresponding Codes of Admission
Applicant

Code of Admission

Foreign Information Media Representative (Principal)

I-1

Spouse of a Principal Foreign Information Media Representative

I-1

Child of a Principal Foreign Information Media Representative

I-1

C. Denials, Motions to Reopen, and Motions to Reconsider
If the applicant does not provide sufficient evidence to establish eligibility for status as a foreign information media representative, the officer prepares a denial notice explaining the specific reasons for the denial. If USCIS denies an application, the applicant may file a Motion to Reopen and/or Reconsider (Form I-290B).

There is no appeal from a denial of an application to change status or extend stay as a foreign information media representative.[3] In certain situations, USCIS may certify the matter to the Administrative Appeals Office.[4]


Part L - Intracompany Transferees (L)
In May 2020, USCIS retired its Adjudicator’s Field Manual (AFM), a collection of our immigration policies and procedures. We are working quickly to update and incorporate all of the AFM content into the USCIS Policy Manual, the agency’s centralized online repository for immigration policies. Until then, we have moved any remaining AFM content to its corresponding Policy Manual Part. To the extent that a provision in the Policy Manual conflicts with remaining AFM content or Policy Memoranda, the updated information in the Policy Manual prevails. If you have questions or concerns about any discrepancies among these resources, contact USCISPolicyManual@uscis.dhs.gov.

AFM Chapter 32 - Petitions for Intracompany Transferees (L Classification) (External) (PDF, 387.96 KB)

Part M - Nonimmigrants of Extraordinary Ability or Achievement (O)
Chapter 1 - Purpose and Background
A. Purpose
The Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) and implementing regulations provide that certain employers or agents may petition in the O-1 visa category for nonimmigrants who have extraordinary ability in the sciences, arts, education, business, or athletics, which has been demonstrated by sustained national or international acclaim.[1] The O-1 visa category may also include those who have a demonstrated a record of extraordinary achievement in the motion picture and television industry.[2]

The INA and implementing regulations also provide that certain employers or agents may petition for accompanying noncitizens (O-2 classification) who seek to enter the United States temporarily and solely for the purpose of accompanying and assisting in the artistic or athletic performance by the O-1 artist or athlete.[3]

B. Background
The Immigration Act of 1990 added the O nonimmigrant classification, providing for the admission of persons of extraordinary ability.[4] However, because of the passage of the Armed Forces Immigration Adjustment Act, implementation of certain O classification provisions were delayed until April 1, 1992.[5] Before Congress enacted these laws, artists, athletes, and other performers were admitted under the H-1 (distinguished merit and ability), H-2, or B-1 visa categories.

C. Legal Authorities
INA 101(a)(15)(O) - Definition of O nonimmigrant classification

INA 101(a)(46) - Definition of extraordinary ability in the arts

INA 214 - Admission of nonimmigrants

8 CFR 214.2(o) - Special requirements for admission, extension, and maintenance of status ("Aliens of extraordinary ability or achievement")


Chapter 2 - Eligibility for O Classification
A. General
The O nonimmigrant classification allows the following noncitizens to enter the United States or change status from another nonimmigrant category:

Nonimmigrants of extraordinary ability in the sciences, arts, education, business, or athletics (O-1 nonimmigrants);

Nonimmigrants of extraordinary achievement in the motion picture or television industry (O-1 nonimmigrants); and 

Certain nonimmigrants accompanying and assisting an O-1 nonimmigrant (O-2 nonimmigrants).

B. Eligibility Requirements
In general, the beneficiary of a petition for O nonimmigrant classification must meet certain eligibility requirements, among others, as applicable:

O-1 Extraordinary Ability in Sciences, Education, Business, or Athletics (commonly referred to as O-1A)

The beneficiary has extraordinary ability in the sciences, education, business, or athletics, which has been demonstrated by sustained national or international acclaim; and

The beneficiary seeks to enter the United States to continue work in the area of extraordinary ability.[1]

O-1 Extraordinary Ability in Arts (commonly referred to as O-1B (Arts))

The beneficiary has extraordinary ability in the arts, which has been demonstrated by sustained national or international acclaim; and

The beneficiary seeks to enter the United States to continue work in the area of extraordinary ability.[2]

O-1 Extraordinary Achievement in Motion Picture or Television Industry (commonly referred to as O-1B (MPTV))

The beneficiary has a demonstrated record of extraordinary achievement in motion picture or television productions; and

The beneficiary seeks to enter the United States to continue work in the area of extraordinary achievement.[3]

O-2 Accompanying Principal O-1 Beneficiary (Essential Support Personnel)

The O-2 beneficiary seeks to enter the United States temporarily and solely for the purpose of accompanying and assisting in the artistic or athletic performance by an O-1 beneficiary who is admitted for a specific event or events;

Is an integral part of such actual performance(s) or event(s);

Has critical skills and experience with the O-1 beneficiary, which are not of a general nature and are not possessed by a U.S. worker; and

Has a foreign residence which the O-2 has no intention of abandoning.

In cases involving a motion picture or television production, the O-2 beneficiary must also have skills and experience with the O-1 beneficiary that are not of a general nature and are critical either:

Based on a pre-existing longstanding working relationship; or

With respect to a specific production because significant production (including pre- and post-production work) will take place both inside and outside the United States and the continuing participation of the O-2 beneficiary is essential to the successful completion of the production.[4]


Chapter 3 - Petitioners
A. Eligible Petitioners
A U.S. employer may file an O-1 or O-2 Petition for a Nonimmigrant Worker (Form I-129). A U.S. agent may also file such a petition when it involves workers who are traditionally self-employed or workers who use agents to arrange short-term employment on their behalf with numerous employers, and in cases where a foreign employer authorizes the agent to act in its behalf. A U.S. agent may be:

The actual employer of the beneficiary;

The representative of both the employer and the beneficiary; or

A person or entity authorized by the employer to act for, or in place of, the employer as its agent.[1]

An O beneficiary may not petition for himself or herself.[2]

B. Petitioner Obligations
In the case of an O-1 or O-2 beneficiary whose employment terminates for reasons other than voluntary resignation, the employer whose offer of employment formed the basis of such nonimmigrant status and the petitioner (if different from the employer) are jointly and severally liable for the reasonable cost of return transportation of the beneficiary to his or her last place of residence prior to his or her entry into the United States.[3]

A petitioner must immediately notify USCIS of any changes in the terms and conditions of employment of a beneficiary that may affect eligibility under INA 101(a)(15)(O) and 8 CFR 214.2(o). The petitioner should file an amended petition when the petitioner continues to employ the beneficiary. If the petitioner no longer employs the beneficiary, the petitioner must send a letter explaining the change(s) to the USCIS office that approved the petition.[4]

C. Agents[5]
A U.S. agent may file a petition in cases involving workers who are traditionally self-employed or workers who use agents to arrange short-term employment on their behalf with numerous employers, and in cases where a foreign employer authorizes the agent to act in its behalf. A U.S. agent may be:

The actual employer of the beneficiary;

The representative of both the employer and the beneficiary; or

A person or entity authorized by the employer to act for, or in place of, the employer as its agent.[6]

A petition filed by an agent is subject to several conditions. A petition involving multiple employers may be filed by a person or company in business as an agent that acts as an agent for both the employers and the beneficiary, if:

The supporting documentation includes a complete itinerary of the event or events;

The itinerary specifies the dates of each service or engagement, the names and addresses of the actual employers, and the names and addresses of the establishments, venues, or locations where the services will be performed;

The contracts between the employers and the beneficiary are submitted; and

The agent explains the terms and conditions of the employment and provides any required documentation.[7]

An agent may be the actual employer of the beneficiary. In order to be eligible to file a petition on behalf of the beneficiary as his or her agent and on behalf of other (multiple) employers of the beneficiary, the petitioner must meet the conditions described above and establish that it is "in business as an agent" (as described below).

The regulations do not specify the evidence for establishing that the petitioner of multiple employers is "in business as an agent." Officers consider evidence that shows that it is more likely than not that the petitioner is in business as an agent for the series of events, services, or engagements that are the subject of the petition. The focus is on whether the petitioner can establish that it is authorized to act as an agent for the other employers for purposes of filing the petition. This means that the petitioner does not have to demonstrate that it normally serves as an agent outside the context of the petition.

The petitioner seeking to serve as an agent for the beneficiary or for other employers must establish that it is duly authorized to act as their agent. An officer may determine that this requirement has been satisfied if, for example, the petitioner presents a document signed by the beneficiary's other employer(s) that states that the petitioner is authorized to act in that employer's place as an agent for the limited purpose of filing the petition with USCIS.[8]

Other examples of probative evidence that may demonstrate that the petitioner "is in business as an agent" may include:

A statement confirming the relevant information (itinerary, names and addresses of the series of employers) signed by the petitioner and the series of employers;

Other types of agency representation contracts;

Fee arrangements; or

Statements from the other employers regarding the nature of the petitioner's representation of the employers and beneficiary.

While evidence of compensation could help establish that the petitioner is in business as an agent, compensation is not a requirement to establish an agency. Again, the officer must evaluate each case based on the facts presented.

Assuming that the petition is approvable and the petitioner has established that it is authorized to act as an agent in order to file the petition on behalf of the other employers, the validity period should last for the duration of the qualifying events, not to exceed the maximum allowable validity period for the classification being sought.[9] If the petition is approvable but the petitioner has not established that it is authorized by the other employers to file the petition on behalf of the other employers (including after responding to a Request for Evidence), the validity period should be limited to the qualifying events for which the petitioner will be directly employing the beneficiary. The validity period cannot exceed the maximum allowable validity period for the classification being sought.


[^ 5] Much of the USCIS policy relating to agents derives from USCIS Memorandum, PM HQ 70/6.2.18, HQ 70/6.2.19, “Requirements for Agents and Sponsors Filing as Petitioners for the O and P Visa Classifications (PDF, 790.07 KB),” issued on November 20, 2009.

[^ 6] See 8 CFR 214.2(o)(2)(iv)(E). For more information on agents, see the O Nonimmigrant Classifications: Question and Answers webpage.

[^ 7] See 8 CFR 214.2(o)(2)(iv)(B) and 8 CFR 214.2(o)(2)(iv)(E)(2). All O petitions must include contracts between the employers and the beneficiary. See 8 CFR 214.2(o)(2)(iv)(E)(2).

[^ 8] No particular form or specific language is required to be submitted with a petition to establish agency. Officers should not issue Requests for Evidence requiring a particular form or specific language in the agency agreement, but should focus on whether the petitioning agent has shown that it has obtained authorization from the other employer(s) to file a petition on their behalf.

[^ 9] See 8 CFR 214.2(o)(6)(iii) and 8 CFR 214.2(o)(12)(ii). See Chapter 9, Admission, Extension of Stay, Change of Status, and Change of Employer [2 USCIS-PM M.9].

Chapter 4 - O-1 Beneficiaries
A. Standard for Classification
In order to qualify as a person of “extraordinary ability” in the sciences, education, business, or athletics (commonly referred to as O-1A), or in arts (commonly referred to as O-1B (Arts)), a beneficiary must have “sustained national or international acclaim.”[1] With regard to motion picture and television productions, a beneficiary (commonly referred to O-1B (MPTV)) must have a demonstrated record of extraordinary achievement.[2] In all cases, an O-1 beneficiary’s achievements must have been recognized in the field through extensive documentation.[3]

The regulations define “extraordinary ability” as applied to the O-1 classification as follows:

In the field of science, education, business, or athletics: a level of expertise indicating that the person is one of the small percentage who have arisen to the very top of the field of endeavor.[4]

In the field of arts: distinction, defined as a high level of achievement in the field of arts, as evidenced by a degree of skill and recognition substantially above that ordinarily encountered to the extent that a person described as prominent is renowned, leading, or well-known in the field of arts.[5]

“Extraordinary achievement” in reference to persons in the motion picture or television industry (including both performers and others) means a very high level of accomplishment in the motion picture or television industry, as evidenced by a degree of skill and recognition significantly above that ordinarily encountered to the extent that the person is recognized as outstanding, notable, or leading in the motion picture or television field.[6]

B. Determining Eligibility for O-1 Classification
For an O-1 Petition for a Nonimmigrant Worker (Form I-129), the officer must determine whether the beneficiary meets the relevant standard outlined in the statute and regulations.”[7] The regulations describe the various types of evidence the petitioner must submit in support of a petition for each type of O-1 beneficiary. In general, the petition must be accompanied by either evidence of receipt of (or in some categories nomination for) a qualifying award, or at least three alternate forms of evidence. However, an officer cannot make a favorable determination simply because the petitioner has submitted the forms of documentation described in the regulations.

As explained in the preamble to the final rule, the evidentiary requirements are not the standard for the classification, but are instead the mechanism for establishing whether the standard is met.[8] Accordingly, the fact that the petitioner has produced evidence satisfying at least three evidentiary criteria does not necessarily establish that the beneficiary is eligible for the O-1 classification.[9] Rather, USCIS must determine eligibility based on whether the totality of the evidence submitted demonstrates that the beneficiary meets the relevant standard.

More specifically, an officer first determines whether the petitioner has submitted evidence meeting the minimum number of criteria or submitted evidence that the beneficiary received a qualifying award (or nomination, if applicable). If the petitioner meets the evidentiary requirements, the officer must then consider all the evidence in the record in its totality to determine if the beneficiary is a person of extraordinary ability or achievement as defined in INA 101(a)(15)(O)(i) and 8 CFR 214.2(o).

Satisfying the Evidentiary Requirements

The analysis in this step is limited to determining whether the evidence submitted is comprised of either a qualifying award (or nomination, if applicable), or at least three of the applicable alternate criteria. In determining whether an evidentiary criterion is met, an officer should evaluate the evidence to determine if it falls within the parameters of the applicable regulation. While an officer should consider whether the submitted evidence meets the language of the regulations to determine whether a particular regulatory criterion has been met, no determination is made during this step as to whether or not the evidence is indicative that the beneficiary meets the applicable definitional standard for the classification.[10]

Totality Determination

Providing required evidence does not, in itself, establish that the beneficiary meets the standard for classification as a person of extraordinary ability or extraordinary achievement. Accordingly, when the evidentiary requirements specified above are satisfied, an officer proceeds to evaluate the totality of all the evidence in the record to determine whether it establishes that the:

O-1A beneficiary has sustained national or international acclaim and is one of the small percentage who have arisen to the very top of his or her field;[11]

O-1B (Arts) beneficiary has sustained national or international acclaim and has achieved distinction in the field of arts;[12] or

O-1B (MPTV) beneficiary has a record of extraordinary achievement in the motion picture and television industry such that he or she has a very high level of accomplishment in the motion picture or television industry evidenced by a degree of skill and recognition significantly above that ordinarily encountered to the extent that the person is recognized as outstanding, notable, or leading in the field.[13]

If the officer determines that the petitioner has failed to meet these standards, the officer should articulate the specific reasons as to why the petitioner, by a preponderance of the evidence, has not demonstrated that the beneficiary is a person of extraordinary ability or achievement based on the relevant statutory and regulatory language.

C. O-1A Beneficiaries in Sciences, Education, Business, or Athletics
In support of an O-1A Petition for a Nonimmigrant Worker (Form I-129), the petitioner must establish that the beneficiary:

Has extraordinary ability in the sciences, education, business, or athletics, which has been demonstrated by sustained national or international acclaim;

Has achievements that have been recognized in the field through extensive documentation; and

Is coming to continue work in the area of extraordinary ability (but not necessarily that the particular duties to be performed require someone of such extraordinary ability).[14]

The supporting documentation for an O-1A petition must include evidence that the beneficiary has received a major internationally recognized award (such as the Nobel Prize) or at least three of the following forms of evidence:

Documentation of the beneficiary's receipt of nationally or internationally recognized prizes or awards for excellence in the field of endeavor;

Documentation of the beneficiary's membership in associations in the field for which classification is sought, which require outstanding achievements of their members, as judged by recognized national or international experts in their disciplines or fields;

Published material in professional or major trade publications or major media about the beneficiary, relating to the beneficiary's work in the field for which classification is sought, which must include the title, date, and author of such published material, and any necessary translation;

Evidence of the beneficiary's participation on a panel, or individually, as a judge of the work of others in the same or in an allied field of specialization for which classification is sought;

Evidence of the beneficiary's original scientific, scholarly, or business-related contributions of major significance in the field;

Evidence of the beneficiary's authorship of scholarly articles in the field, in professional journals, or other major media;

Evidence that the beneficiary has been employed in a critical or essential capacity for organizations and establishments that have a distinguished reputation; or

Evidence that the beneficiary has either commanded a high salary or will command a high salary or other remuneration for services, as evidenced by contracts or other reliable evidence.[15]

If these criteria are not readily applicable to the beneficiary’s occupation, the petitioner may submit comparable evidence to establish the beneficiary’s eligibility.[16]

Petitioners should submit evidence outlined in the evidentiary criteria if the criteria readily apply to the beneficiary’s occupation.[17] However, if the petitioner establishes that a particular criterion is not readily applicable to the beneficiary’s occupation, the petitioner may then submit evidence that is not specifically described in that criterion but is comparable to that criterion.[18]

A petitioner is not required to show that all or a majority of the criteria does not readily apply to the beneficiary’s occupation before USCIS will accept comparable evidence. Instead, for comparable evidence to be considered, the petitioner must explain why a particular evidentiary criterion listed in the regulations is not readily applicable to the beneficiary’s occupation, as well as why the submitted evidence is “comparable” to that criterion. A general unsupported assertion that the listed criterion does not readily apply to the beneficiary’s occupation is not probative. However, a statement alone can be sufficient if it is detailed, specific, and credible. Officers do not consider comparable evidence if the petitioner submits evidence in lieu of a particular criterion that is readily applicable to the beneficiary’s occupation simply because the beneficiary cannot satisfy that criterion.[19]

A petitioner relying on evidence that is comparable to one or more of the criteria listed at 8 CFR 214.2(o)(3)(iii)(B) must still meet at least three separate evidentiary criteria to satisfy the evidence requirements, even if one or more of those criteria are met through evidence that is not specifically described in the regulation but is comparable.[20] While a petitioner relying on comparable evidence is not limited to the kinds of evidence listed in the criteria, the use of comparable evidence does not change the standard for the classification. It remains the petitioner’s burden to establish that the beneficiary has extraordinary ability in his or her field of endeavor.

When the evidentiary requirements specified above are satisfied, an officer proceeds to evaluate the totality of all the evidence in the record to determine whether the beneficiary has extraordinary ability with sustained national and international acclaim, as described in the O statute and regulations.[21]

D. O-1B Beneficiaries in the Arts
In support of an O-1B (Arts) Petition for a Nonimmigrant Worker (Form I-129), the petitioner must establish that the beneficiary:

Has extraordinary ability in the arts which has been demonstrated by sustained national or international acclaim;

Has achievements that have been recognized in the field through extensive documentation; and

Is coming to work in the area of extraordinary ability (but not necessarily that the particular duties to be performed require someone of such extraordinary ability).[22]

The supporting documentation for an O-1B (Arts) petition must include evidence that the beneficiary has received, or been nominated for, a significant national or international award in the particular field (such as an Academy Award, Emmy, Grammy, or Director’s Guild Award) or at least three of the following forms of evidence:

Evidence that the beneficiary has performed, and will perform, services as a lead or starring participant in productions or events that have a distinguished reputation, as evidenced by critical reviews, advertisements, publicity releases, publications, contracts, or endorsements;

Evidence that the beneficiary has achieved national or international recognition for achievements, as evidenced by critical reviews or other published materials by or about the beneficiary in major newspapers, trade journals, magazines, or other publications;

Evidence that the beneficiary has performed, and will perform, in a lead, starring, or critical role for organizations and establishments that have a distinguished reputation, as evidenced by articles in newspapers, trade journals, publications, or testimonials;

Evidence that the beneficiary has a record of major commercial or critically acclaimed successes, as evidenced by such indicators as title, rating, standing in the field, box office receipts, motion pictures or television ratings, and other occupational achievements reported in trade journals, major newspapers, or other publications;

Evidence that the beneficiary has received significant recognition for achievements from organizations, critics, government agencies, or other recognized experts in the field in which the beneficiary is engaged. Such testimonials must be in a form which clearly indicates the author's authority, expertise, and knowledge of the beneficiary's achievements; or

Evidence that the beneficiary has either commanded a high salary or will command a high salary or other substantial remuneration for services in relation to others in the field, as evidenced by contracts or other reliable evidence.[23]

If these criteria are not readily applicable to the beneficiary’s occupation, the petitioner may submit comparable evidence to establish the beneficiary’s eligibility.[24]

Petitioners should submit evidence outlined in the evidentiary criteria if the criteria readily apply to the beneficiary’s occupation.[25] However, if the petitioner establishes that a particular criterion is not readily applicable to the beneficiary’s occupation, the petitioner may then use the comparable evidence provision to submit additional evidence that is not specifically described in that criterion but is comparable to that criterion.

A petitioner is not required to show that all or a majority of the criteria does not readily apply to the beneficiary’s occupation before USCIS will accept comparable evidence. Instead, for comparable evidence to be considered, the petitioner must explain why a particular evidentiary criterion listed in the regulations is not readily applicable to the beneficiary’s occupation as well as why the submitted evidence is “comparable” to that criterion. A general unsupported assertion that the listed criterion does not readily apply to the beneficiary’s occupation is not probative. However, a statement alone can be sufficient if it is detailed, specific, and credible. Officers do not consider comparable evidence if the petitioner submits evidence in lieu of a particular criterion that is readily applicable to the beneficiary’s occupation simply because the beneficiary cannot satisfy that criterion.[26]

A petitioner relying on evidence that is comparable to one or more of the criteria listed at 8 CFR 214.2(o)(3)(iv)(B) must still meet at least three separate evidentiary criteria to satisfy the evidence requirements, even if one or more of those criteria are met through evidence that is not specifically described in the regulation but is comparable.[27] While a petitioner relying on comparable evidence is not limited to the kinds of evidence listed in the criteria, the use of comparable evidence does not change the standard for the classification. It remains the petitioner’s burden to establish that the beneficiary has extraordinary ability in his or her field of endeavor.

When the evidentiary requirements specified above are satisfied, an officer proceeds to evaluate the totality of all the evidence in the record to determine whether the beneficiary has extraordinary ability with sustained national and international acclaim, as described in the O statute and regulations.[28]

E. O-1B Beneficiaries in Motion Picture or Television
In support of an O-1B (MPTV) Petition for a Nonimmigrant Worker (Form I-129), the petitioner must establish that the beneficiary has demonstrated a record of extraordinary achievement in motion picture or television productions and is coming to continue to work in such productions. However, the productions need not require someone with a record of extraordinary achievement.

The supporting documentation for an O-1B (MPTV) petition must include evidence that the beneficiary has received, or been nominated for, a significant national or international award in the particular field (such as an Academy Award, Emmy, Grammy, or Director’s Guild Award) or at least three of the following forms of evidence:

Evidence that the beneficiary has performed, and will perform, services as a lead or starring participant in productions or events that have a distinguished reputation, as evidenced by critical reviews, advertisements, publicity releases, publications, contracts, or endorsements;

Evidence that the beneficiary has achieved national or international recognition for achievements, as evidenced by critical reviews or other published materials by or about the beneficiary in major newspapers, trade journals, magazines, or other publications;

Evidence that the beneficiary has performed, and will perform, in a lead, starring, or critical role for organizations and establishments that have a distinguished reputation, as evidenced by articles in newspapers, trade journals, publications, or testimonials;

Evidence that the beneficiary has a record of major commercial or critically acclaimed successes, as evidenced by such indicators as title, rating, standing in the field, box office receipts, motion pictures or television ratings, and other occupational achievements reported in trade journals, major newspapers, or other publications;

Evidence that the beneficiary has received significant recognition for achievements from organizations, critics, government agencies, or other recognized experts in the beneficiary’s field. Such testimonials must be in a form that clearly indicates the author's authority, expertise, and knowledge of the beneficiary's achievements; or

Evidence that the beneficiary has either commanded a high salary or will command a high salary or other substantial remuneration for services in relation to others in the field, as evidenced by contracts or other reliable evidence.[29]

Petitioners for beneficiaries working in motion picture or television productions must submit evidence that applies to the criteria listed above; they may not rely on comparable evidence.[30]

When the evidentiary requirements mentioned above are satisfied, an officer proceeds to evaluate the totality of all the evidence in the record in order to determine whether the beneficiary has extraordinary achievement in the motion picture and television industry as described in the O statute and regulations.[31]


Chapter 5 - O-2 Beneficiaries
A. General
USCIS may classify beneficiaries who are essential to an O-1 beneficiary’s artistic or athletic performance and are coming solely to assist in that performance as O-2 accompanying beneficiaries.[1] The O-2 beneficiary must be an integral part of the actual performance or event and possess critical skills and experience with the O-1 that are not of a general nature and that U.S. workers do not possess.[2]

If the O-2 beneficiary is accompanying an O-1 beneficiary in the television or motion picture industry, he or she must have skills and experience with the O-1 beneficiary that are not of a general nature and skills that are critical, due to a pre-existing or long-standing working relationship with the O-1 beneficiary. If he or she is accompanying the O-1 beneficiary for a specific production only, the person may be eligible for an O-2 classification because significant production (including pre- and post-production work) will take place both inside and outside the United States and the continuing participation of the O-2 beneficiary is essential to the successful completion of the production.

USCIS may not grant O-2 classification for beneficiaries to support O-1 beneficiaries with extraordinary ability in fields of business, education, or science.[3]

The O-2 beneficiaries may not work separate or apart from the O-1 beneficiaries they support and may change employers only in conjunction with a change of employer by the O-1 beneficiary. Although multiple beneficiaries may be included on a single O-2 Petition for a Nonimmigrant Worker (Form I-129), they cannot be included on the O-1 beneficiary’s petition.

B. Documentation and Evidence
A petition for an O-2 beneficiary who will accompany an O-1A (athlete) or O-1B (artist) of extraordinary ability must be supported by evidence that the O-2 beneficiary is coming to the United States to assist in the performance of the O-1 beneficiary. The O-2 beneficiary must be an integral part of the actual performance and have critical skills and experience with the O-1 beneficiary that are not of a general nature and not possessed by a U.S. worker.[4]

A petition for an O-2 beneficiary who will accompany an O-1B (MPTV) beneficiary of extraordinary achievement must be supported by:

Evidence of the current essentiality, critical skills, and experience of the O-2 beneficiary with the O-1 beneficiary and evidence that the O-2 beneficiary has substantial experience performing the critical skills and essential support services for the O-1 beneficiary; or

In the case of a specific motion picture or television production, evidence that significant production has taken place outside the United States and will take place inside the United States, and that the continuing participation of the O-2 beneficiary is essential to the successful completion of the production.[5]



Chapter 6 - Family Members
The spouse and unmarried children under 21 years old of a principal O-1 or O-2 nonimmigrant may qualify for dependent O-3 nonimmigrant status if they are accompanying or following to join the O-1 or O-2 in the United States.[1] The O-3 spouse and unmarried children under 21 receive nonimmigrant status for the same period of time and subject to the same conditions as the O-1 or O-2 principal.[2] An O-3 dependent may not accept employment in the United States pursuant to such status.[3]


Chapter 7 - Documentation and Evidence
A. General
USCIS requires a petitioning employer or agent to file the Petition for a Nonimmigrant Worker (Form I-129) and required fee for all beneficiaries seeking classification as an O-1 or O-2 nonimmigrant.[1] The petition must be filed in accordance with DHS regulations and the form instructions, and with the required fees.[2] The petitioner may not file the petition more than 1 year before the actual need for the beneficiary's services.[3]

An O-1 or O-2 beneficiary may work for more than one employer at the same time.[4] When the beneficiary works for more than one employer, each employer must properly file a separate petition along with the required documentation and fees unless an established agent files the petition.[5]

More than one O-2 accompanying beneficiary may be included on a petition if they are assisting the same O-1 beneficiary for the same events or performances, during the same period of time, and in the same location.[6] An employer or agent may not include multiple O-1 beneficiaries on the same petition.[7]

B. Documentation and Evidence
1. Required Evidence
A petitioner must include the following with the petition:

Evidence specific to the particular classification sought;[8]

Copies of any written contracts between the petitioner and the beneficiary or, if there is no written contract, a summary of the terms of the oral agreement under which the beneficiary will be employed;

An explanation of the nature of the events or activities, the beginning and ending dates for the events or activities, and a copy of any itinerary for the events or activities;[9] and

A written advisory opinion(s) from the appropriate consulting entity or entities.[10]

2. Form of Evidence
The evidence submitted with the petition must conform to the following:

Affidavits, contracts, awards, and similar documentation must reflect the nature of the beneficiary's achievement and be executed by an officer or responsible person employed by the institution, firm, establishment, or organization where the work was performed.

Affidavits written by present or former employers or recognized experts certifying to the recognition and extraordinary ability or extraordinary achievement of the beneficiary must specifically describe the beneficiary's recognition and ability or achievement in factual terms and set forth the expertise of the affiant and the manner in which the affiant acquired such information.

The petitioner may submit a legible photocopy of a document in support of the petition in lieu of the original. However, the original document must be submitted if requested by USCIS.[11]

3. Contracts
The regulation requires the submission of any written contracts between the petitioner and the beneficiary but allows for the submission of a summary of the terms of an oral agreement where there is no written contract.[12] Evidence of an oral agreement may include, but is not limited to, emails between the contractual parties, a written summation of the terms of the agreement, or any other evidence that demonstrates that an oral agreement was created.

The summary of the oral agreement must contain:

The terms offered by the petitioner (employer); and

The terms accepted by the beneficiary (employee).

The summary does not have to be signed by both parties to establish the oral agreement.[13]

4. Consultations
A statutorily mandated consultation process exists for all O nonimmigrant petitions.[14] The source and contents of the consultation vary, depending upon the type of O petition.

Consultation Process for O Nonimmigrants
Petition Type

Source and Contents of Consultations

O-1A and O-1B (Arts)

The petitioner must provide a consultation in the form of an advisory opinion from a U.S. “peer group” in the area of the beneficiary’s ability (which may include a labor organization) or a person or persons with expertise in the area of the beneficiary’s ability. The contents should, if favorable, describe the beneficiary's ability and achievements in the field of endeavor, describe the nature of the duties to be performed, and state whether the position requires the services of a person of extraordinary ability, or may state “no objection.” If the advisory opinion is not favorable to the petitioner, the advisory opinion must set forth a specific statement of facts which supports the conclusion reached in the opinion. If an advisory opinion is submitted from a group other than a labor organization, USCIS must submit a copy of the petition and supporting documents to the national office of the appropriate union (if any exists). If the labor organization does not respond, USCIS renders a decision on the evidence of record.[15] If the petitioner establishes that no appropriate peer group exists, including a labor organization, USCIS renders a decision on the evidence of record.[16]

O-1B (MPTV)

The petitioner must provide consultations in the form of advisory opinions from both the union representing the beneficiary’s occupational peers and a management organization in the area of the beneficiary’s ability. The contents may include statements describing the beneficiary’s achievements in motion picture or television productions and whether the proposed position requires the services of a person of extraordinary achievement, or may state “no objection.” If an advisory opinion is not favorable to the petitioner, the advisory opinion must set forth a specific statement of facts which supports the conclusion reached in the opinion. If the petitioner establishes that no appropriate group exists, including a labor organization, USCIS renders a decision on the evidence of record.[17]

O-2

The petitioner must provide a consultation in the form of an advisory opinion from the labor organization having expertise in the skill area. If the O-2 is sought for employment in the motion picture or television industry, opinions must be provided from both a labor union and a management organization.[18] The opinion may include information regarding the beneficiary’s particular skills, his or her experience working with the O-1 beneficiary, and whether the project involves a situation that includes work both inside and outside the United States (if applicable), or may state “no objection.” If an advisory opinion is not favorable to the petitioner, the advisory opinion must set forth a specific statement of facts which supports the conclusion reached in the opinion. Generally, if the petitioner establishes that an appropriate labor organization does not exist, USCIS renders a decision on the evidence of record.[19]


USCIS maintains a list of organizations that provide advisory opinions on O-1 and O-2 beneficiaries.

The O regulations specify mandatory response times for advisory opinions requested by USCIS in routine and expedited cases and prescribe action to be taken when a requested opinion is not received.[20] The consultations are advisory in nature only and are not binding on USCIS. A negative advisory opinion does not automatically result in the denial of the petition, as decisions must be based on the totality of the evidence. Accordingly, USCIS may favorably consider evidence submitted by the petitioner to overcome a negative advisory opinion.

Use of Prior Consultation

USCIS may waive the consultation requirement for persons of extraordinary ability in the field of arts if the beneficiary seeks readmission to the United States to perform similar services within 2 years of the date of a previous advisory opinion. After USCIS grants the waiver, USCIS forwards a copy of the petition and documentation to the national office of an appropriate labor organization within 5 days.[21] Petitioners desiring to avail themselves of the waiver should submit a copy of the prior consultation with the petition.

Chapter 8 - Adjudication
Officers must carefully review each Petition for a Nonimmigrant Worker (Form I-129) to determine whether the petitioner has established eligibility based on the applicable requirements for the type of O classification being sought. Officers must apply a “preponderance of the evidence” standard when evaluating eligibility for the O nonimmigrant classification.​[1] The burden of proving eligibility for the benefit sought rests entirely with the petitioner.[2]

A. Decision
Approvals

If the petitioner properly filed the petition and the officer is satisfied that the petitioner has met the required eligibility standards, the officer approves the petition. The approval period must not exceed the maximum period of stay allowed.[3] Furthermore, USCIS should not deny a petition on the basis of the approval of a permanent labor certification or the filing of a preference petition for the O-1 beneficiary.[4]

The table below provides a list of the classifications for nonimmigrant of extraordinary ability or achievement, those accompanying and assisting the principal O-1 beneficiary’s artistic or athletic performance, and dependents.

Classes of Beneficiaries and Corresponding Codes of Admission
Beneficiary

Code of Admission

Nonimmigrant of extraordinary ability in the sciences, education, business, or athletics (principal)

O-1A

Nonimmigrant of extraordinary ability in the arts (principal)

O-1B

Nonimmigrant of extraordinary achievement in the motion picture or television industry (principal)

O-1B

Accompanying person who is coming to the United States to assist in the performance of certain O-1s

O-2

Spouse or child of an O-1 or O-2

O-3

Once USCIS approves the petition, USCIS notifies the petitioner of the approval using a Notice of Action (Form I-797).[5]

Denials

If the petitioner does not meet the eligibility requirements, the officer denies the petition.[6] If the officer denies the petition, he or she must notify the petitioner of the denial in writing. The written decision must explain why USCIS denied the petition and must include information about appeal rights and the opportunity to file a motion to reopen or reconsider.[7] The office that issued the decision has jurisdiction over any motion and the Administrative Appeals Office (AAO) has jurisdiction over any appeal.[8]

B. Revocation
USCIS may revoke an approved petition at any time, even after the validity of the petition has expired. USCIS automatically revokes the petition if the petitioner ceases to exist or files a written withdrawal of the petition.[9]

USCIS may also revoke an O petition approval on notice. USCIS sends the petitioner a Notice of Intent to Revoke (NOIR) if it is determined that:

The beneficiary is no longer employed by the petitioner in the capacity specified in the petition;

The statement of facts contained in the petition was not true and correct;

The petitioner violated the terms and conditions of the approved petition;

The petitioner violated the statute or regulations; or

The approval of the petition violated the regulations or involved gross error.[10]

The NOIR must contain a detailed statement of the grounds for the revocation and the period allowed for the petitioner’s rebuttal. USCIS considers all relevant evidence presented in deciding whether to revoke the petition.

The petitioner may appeal the decision to revoke a petition to the AAO if USCIS revoked the petition on notice. Petitioners may not appeal an automatic revocation.[11]


Chapter 9 - Admission, Extension of Stay, Change of Status, and Change of Employer
A. Admission
If approved for classification as an O nonimmigrant and found otherwise admissible, a beneficiary may be admitted for a period determined to be necessary to accomplish the event or activity, not to exceed 3 years.[1]

Validity Period

If approved after the date the petitioner indicated services would begin, the validity period generally commences with the date of approval. The validity period must not exceed the period determined by USCIS to be necessary to complete the event or activity and must not exceed 3 years.

A beneficiary may be admitted to the United States for the validity period of the petition, plus a period of up to 10 days before the validity period begins and 10 days after the validity period ends. The beneficiary may engage in employment only during the validity period of the petition.[2]

Nonimmigrants described in the O classification are "seek[ing] to enter the United States to continue to work in the area of extraordinary ability," and may be authorized for a period of stay necessary "to provide for the event (or events) for which the nonimmigrant is admitted.”[3] The O classification is for a beneficiary coming to the United States "to perform services relating to an event or events."[4]

The O regulations define an event as an activity such as, but not limited to: a scientific project, conference, convention, lecture, series, tour, exhibit, business project, academic year, or engagement.[5] In addition, a job that may not have a specific engagement or project may also fall under this definition if the job is the "activity" within the beneficiary's area of extraordinary ability. Such activities may include short vacations, promotional appearances, and stopovers that are incidental or related to the event. Therefore, the regulations clearly indicate that USCIS may approve a petition to cover not only the actual event or events but also services and activities in connection with the event or events.

There is no statutory or regulatory authority for the proposition that a gap of a certain number of days automatically indicates a “new event,” nor is there a requirement for a "single event.” Rather, the focus is on whether the beneficiary will work in the area of extraordinary ability.[6]

The regulations define the evidentiary standard for identifying the services or activities relating to the event(s) by requiring "an explanation of the nature of the events or activities and a copy of any itinerary for the events or activities."[7] Unlike other nonimmigrant categories that have a specified time limit, a temporal period is not specified for O nonimmigrants. The regulations state that the validity period must be that which is "necessary to accomplish the event or activity, not to exceed 3 years."[8]

If the activities on the itinerary are related in such a way that they could be considered an event, the petition should be approved for the requested validity period. For example, a series of events that involve the same performers and the same or similar performance, such as a tour by a performing artist in venues around the United States, would constitute an event. In another example, if there is a break in between events in the United States and the petitioner indicates the beneficiary will be returning abroad to engage in activities that are incidental or related to the work performed in the United States, it does not necessarily interrupt the original event.

The burden is on the petitioner to demonstrate that the activities listed on the itinerary relate to the event despite gaps in which the beneficiary may travel abroad and return to the United States. Those gaps may include time in which the beneficiary attends seminars, vacations, or travels between engagements.[9] Those gaps would not be considered to interrupt the original event, and the full period of time requested may be granted as the gaps are incidental to the original event. If a review of the itinerary does not establish an event or activity or a series of connected events and activities that would allow the validity period requested, or if the petitioner is requesting a validity period beyond the last established event or activity, the officer may, in his or her discretion, issue a Request for Evidence (RFE). The RFE provides the petitioner an opportunity to provide additional documentation to establish the requested validity period.

Officers evaluate the totality of the evidence submitted under the pertinent statute and regulations to determine if the events and activities on the itinerary are connected in such a way that they would be considered an event for purposes of the validity period. If the evidence establishes that the activities or events are related in such a way that they could be considered an event, the officer approves the petition for the length of the established validity period.

Even though USCIS may consider a group of related activities to be an event, speculative employment or freelancing are not allowed.[10] A petitioner must establish that there are events or activities in the beneficiary's field of extraordinary ability for the validity period requested. Evidence of such events or activities could include an itinerary for a tour, contract or summary of the terms of the oral agreement under which the beneficiary will be employed, or contracts between the beneficiary and employers if an agent is being used.

Maintaining Status

USCIS does not consider a beneficiary in O-1 status to have failed to maintain nonimmigrant status solely because of the cessation of the employment on which the visa classification was based for a period of up to 60 days or until the end of the authorized validity period, whichever is shorter. USCIS may shorten or eliminate this 60-day grace period as a matter of discretion. Unless otherwise authorized under 8 CFR 274a.12, the O-1 beneficiary may not work during such a period.[11]

Although the O-2 accompanying beneficiary must obtain his or her own classification, this classification does not entitle him or her to work separate and apart from the O-1 beneficiary to whom he or she provides support.[12]

B. Extension of Stay
A petitioner may request an extension of stay for an O-1 or O-2 nonimmigrant beneficiary by filing a new Petition for a Nonimmigrant Worker (Form I-129).[13] O-3 dependents may request an extension of stay or change of status by filing an Application to Extend/Change Nonimmigrant Status (Form I-539), and, when applicable, Supplemental Information for Application to Extend/Change Nonimmigrant Status (Form I-539A).

USCIS may authorize an extension of stay in increments of up to 1 year for an O-1 or O-2 beneficiary to continue or complete the same event or activity for which he or she was admitted, plus an additional 10 days to allow the beneficiary to get his or her personal affairs in order.[14] There is no limit to the number of extensions of stay a petitioner can file for the same beneficiary.

USCIS should not deny requests for extensions of stay filed by the initial petitioner solely on the basis that the event that supported the initial petition has changed. USCIS also should not deny such requests filed by subsequent petitioners solely on the basis that the event or employer has changed. Furthermore, USCIS should not deny such requests on the basis of the approval of a permanent labor certification or the filing of a preference petition for the O-1 beneficiary.[15]

C. Change of Status
Generally, a beneficiary in a current valid nonimmigrant status who has not violated his or her status is eligible to change status to that of an O nonimmigrant without having to depart the United States.[16]

To change to O nonimmigrant status, the petitioning employer or agent should file a Petition for a Nonimmigrant Worker (Form I-129) before the beneficiary’s current status expires and indicate the request is for a change of status.[17] The beneficiary cannot work in the new nonimmigrant classification until USCIS approves the petition and the change of status request. If USCIS determines that the beneficiary is eligible for the O classification, but not a change of status, the beneficiary must depart the United States, apply for a nonimmigrant visa at a U.S. consular post abroad (unless visa exempt), and then be readmitted to the United States in O-1 or O-2 status.[18]

USCIS should not deny an application for change of status on the basis of the approval of a permanent labor certification or the filing of a preference petition for the O-1 beneficiary.[19]

D. Change of Employer
If an O nonimmigrant in the United States seeks to change employers, the new employer or agent must file a Petition for a Nonimmigrant Worker (Form I-129) to authorize the new employment and, if applicable, request to extend the beneficiary’s stay. An O-2 beneficiary may change employers only in conjunction with a change of employers by the principal O-1 beneficiary. If an agent filed the petition, the agent must file an amended petition with evidence relating to the new employer.[20]

In the case of a professional O-1 athlete traded from one organization to another, employment authorization for the player automatically continues for a period of 30 days after acquisition by the new organization, within which time the new organization is expected to file a new Petition for a Nonimmigrant Worker (Form I-129). If a new petition is not filed within 30 days, employment authorization ceases. If a new petition is filed within 30 days, the professional athlete is deemed to be in valid O-1 status, and employment continues to be authorized, until the petition is adjudicated. If USCIS denies the new petition, employment authorization ceases.[21]


Chapter 2 - Eligibility Requirements
A. P-1 Nonimmigrant Classification
1. Internationally Recognized Athlete (P-1A Nonimmigrant)
The P-1A nonimmigrant classification includes individual athletes with an internationally recognized reputation and members of an athletic team that is internationally recognized.[1] The athlete or team must be coming to the United States to participate in an athletic competition which has a distinguished reputation and which requires participation of an athlete or athletic team with an international reputation.[2]

The regulatory requirements that the prospective competitions have a “distinguished reputation” and “require” the participation or services of an internationally recognized athlete or team derive from the statutory language stating that a qualifying athlete is one who performs “at an internationally recognized level of performance.”[3] Accordingly, USCIS interprets this regulatory language consistent with the statutory reference to athletes performing at an “internationally recognized level of performance.” More specifically, the relevant statutory and regulatory provisions do not require that an athlete or team be coming to participate in a competition that is limited to internationally recognized participants. Rather, it is sufficient for the petitioner to show that the competition is at an internationally recognized level of performance such that it requires that caliber of athlete or team to be among its participants or that some level of participation by internationally recognized athletes is required to maintain its current distinguished reputation in the sport.

Relevant considerations for determining whether competitions are at an internationally recognized level of performance such that they require the participation of an internationally recognized athlete or team include, but are not limited to:

The level of viewership, attendance, revenue, and major media coverage of the events;

The extent of past participation by internationally recognized athletes or teams;

The international ranking of athletes competing; or

Documented merits requirements for participants.

If the record shows the participation of internationally recognized caliber competitors is currently unusual or uncommon, this may indicate that the event may not currently be at an internationally recognized level of performance. In addition, while not necessarily determinative, the fact that a competition is open to competitors at all skill levels may be a relevant negative factor in analyzing whether it is at an internationally recognized level of performance. If the event includes differentiated categories of competition based on skill level, the focus should be on the reputation and level of recognition of the specific category of competition in which the athlete or team seeks to participate.[4]

Individual athletes who are internationally recognized may also be coming to the United States to join a U.S.-based team.[5] When a petition is for a foreign athletic team, each member of an internationally recognized athletic team may be granted P-1A classification based on that relationship, but may not perform services separate and apart from the athletic team.[6]

2. COMPETE Act [Reserved]
3. Member of Internationally Recognized Entertainment Group (P-1B Nonimmigrant)
The P-1B nonimmigrant classification for entertainers applies to:

Members of an internationally recognized entertainment group coming to the United States; and

A person coming to the United States to join, as a member, an internationally recognized group, which can be based in the United States or abroad.[7]

A member of an internationally-recognized entertainment group may be granted P-1B classification based on that relationship, but may not perform services separate and apart from the entertainment group. The P-1B nonimmigrant who is a member of an internationally recognized entertainment group must be coming to the United States to perform with the group as a unit. In addition, the entertainment group must be internationally recognized as outstanding for a sustained and substantial period of time, and 75 percent of the group must have had a sustained and substantial relationship with the group for at least 1 year.[8] The P-1B nonimmigrant classification is not appropriate for a person performing as a solo entertainer.

Provisions for Certain Entertainment Groups

The regulations allow for three special provisions for certain entertainment groups:

A waiver of the international recognition and 1-year group membership requirement for circus personnel (both those who perform and those who constitute an integral and essential part of the performance), provided that they are coming to join a circus or circus group that has been recognized nationally as outstanding for a sustained and substantial period of time;

A waiver of the international recognition requirement, in consideration of special circumstances, for some entertainment groups recognized nationally as being outstanding in its discipline for a sustained and substantial period of time; and

A waiver of the 1-year sustained and substantial relationship requirement for 75 percent of the group due to exigent circumstances.[9]

Group – Defined

The term "group" is defined as two or more persons established as one entity or unit to perform or to provide a service.[10] “Member of a group” means a person who is actually performing the entertainment services.[11] It does not include persons who assist in the presentation who are not on the stage (such as lighting or sound technicians). These support personnel would need to be petitioned for as essential support (P-1S) and a separate petition must be filed for them.[12]

If a solo artist or entertainer traditionally performs on stage with the same group of people, such as back-up singers or musicians, the act may be classified as a group. This group would then need to meet the “75 percent rule.” The “75 percent rule” means that 75 percent of the members of the group must have been performing entertainment services for the group for a minimum of 1 year or more.[13] If the group does not meet the 75 percent rule, the artist or entertainer would need to qualify for another classification, such as an O-1 nonimmigrant (rather than P-1B) and the back-up band as O-2 nonimmigrants.

B. Performers Under Reciprocal Exchange or Culturally Unique Programs
1. Individual Performer or Part of a Group Performing Under a Reciprocal Exchange Program (P-2 Nonimmigrant)
A P-2 nonimmigrant is a person coming to the United States to perform as an artist or entertainer, individually or as part of a group and who seeks to perform under a reciprocal exchange program which is between organization(s) in the United States and organization(s) in one or more foreign states.[14]

2. Artist or Entertainer as Part of Culturally Unique Program (P-3 Nonimmigrant)
A P-3 nonimmigrant is a person coming to the United States solely to perform, teach, or coach under a commercial or noncommercial program that is culturally unique.[15]

C. Essential Support Personnel
Essential support personnel are eligible for a P-1S, P-2S, or P-3S nonimmigrant classification if the petitioner can establish that they are an integral part of the performance of the P-1, P-2, or P-3 athlete, team, entertainer, or entertainment group because he or she performs support services that cannot be readily performed by a U.S. worker and which are essential to the successful performance of services by the P-1, P-2, or P-3 nonimmigrant.[16]

D. Treatment of Family Members
The spouse and unmarried children may qualify for P-4 derivative classification. They are entitled to the same period of admission and limitations as the beneficiary of the P petition. They are not allowed to accept employment unless they have been independently granted employment authorization. If the spouse or unmarried child is in the United States in another nonimmigrant classification, he or she must separately file an Application to Extend/Change Nonimmigrant Status (Form I-539) and, if applicable, Supplemental Information for Application to Extend/Change Nonimmigrant Status (Form I-539A) to request a change of status to P-4. The spouse or unmarried child must also separately file Form I-539 if seeking an extension of stay based on the principal nonimmigrant’s stay being extended.  

Chapter 3 - Petitioners
A petitioner seeking to classify a person as a P nonimmigrant must submit a Petition for a Nonimmigrant Worker (Form I-129) on his or her behalf. The petition must be properly filed with the required fee in accordance with the Form I-129 filing instructions.[1] If the beneficiary will work for more than one employer within the same time period, each employer must file a separate petition unless an agent files the petition and certain requirements are met.[2]

A request for an extension of stay for a P nonimmigrant or change of status for a person who is present in the United States in another nonimmigrant classification must be filed on Form I-129.[3] If the person is already in the United States in a P nonimmigrant status and a new employer wishes to petition for him or her, that new employer must use Form I-129 to file for a change of employer or to add an employer, and to request an extension of stay for the person.[4]

If there are any material changes in the terms or conditions of the P nonimmigrant’s employment, the petitioner must file an amended petition. However, a petitioner may add additional, similar performances, engagements, or competitions during the validity period without filing an amended petition.[5]

A. Eligible Petitioners
The following petitioners may submit Form I-129 seeking to classify a person as a P nonimmigrant:

Petitions for P-1 nonimmigrants may be filed by a U.S. employer, a U.S. sponsoring organization, a U.S. agent, or a foreign employer through a U.S. agent;
Petitions for P-2 nonimmigrants may be filed by the U.S. labor organization which negotiated the reciprocal exchange agreement, the sponsoring organization, or a U.S. employer; and
Petitions for P-3 nonimmigrants may be filed by the sponsoring organization or a U.S. employer.[6]
Agents as Petitioners

A U.S. agent may file a P-1 petition in the case where the beneficiary is in an occupation where workers are generally self-employed or use agents to arrange short-term employment with multiple employers, or where a foreign employer authorizes a U.S. agent to act on its behalf.[7]

B. Multiple Beneficiaries
In some circumstances, outlined below, a petitioner may file for multiple beneficiaries on the same petition.

P-1 Petition

A petitioner may file for multiple P-1A  beneficiaries.[8] In addition, a petitioner may file for multiple beneficiaries that are members of a group seeking classification based on the reputation of the group.[9] However, a separate petition must be submitted for the essential support (non-performing) personnel.[10] More than one P-1 essential support personnel may be included on a petition.

P-2 Petition

P-2 group members can be included on a single petition. A separate petition must be submitted for the essential support personnel.[11]

P-3 Petition

P-3 group members can be included on a single petition. A separate petition must be submitted for the essential support personnel.[12]


Chapter 4 - Documentation and Evidence
A. Evidence for P-1 Classification
A P-1 petition for classification as an internationally recognized athlete, team, or entertainment group must be supported by evidence that the person, group, or team is internationally recognized as outstanding in the discipline and is entering to perform services which require such a level of performance.[1] If the petition is for a group of entertainers, the petition must contain evidence that at least 75 percent of the group have been performing with the group for at least 1 year.[2] The petitioner must submit a consultation from a labor organization, if one exists.[3]

Internationally Recognized Individual Athlete or Athletic Team

For a team, the petitioner must submit evidence that the team as a unit is internationally recognized. For an individual athlete, the petitioner must submit evidence that the athlete has achieved international recognition in the sport based on his or her reputation.[4]

A petition for an athletic team or individual athlete must include a tendered contract with a “major United States sports league or team” or tendered contract in an individual sport commensurate with international recognition in that sport, if such contracts are normally executed in the sport.[5] USCIS interprets “major United States sports league” as a league that has a distinguished reputation that is commensurate with an internationally recognized level of performance, and “major United States sports team” as a team that participates in such a league, consistent with the statutory standard for internationally recognized athletes.[6] 

Therefore, under this interpretation, the league (or the team within the league) may be one where the level of competition in the league is such that the league (or a team within the league) would not be able to remain competitive or maintain its current distinguished reputation in the sport without the services of at least some internationally recognized caliber athletes.

Factors that may be considered include, but are not limited to: information about the structure of the league or the differentiated categories of competition; documentation showing a pattern of participation by internationally recognized athletes; level of viewership, attendance, revenue, and major media coverage about the league or its teams or competitions; international ranking of athletes competing; or documented merits requirements for league participants.[7]

The petitioner must also submit documentation of at least two forms of the following:[8]

Evidence of significant participation in a prior season with a major U.S. sports league;[9]

Evidence of participation in international competition with a national team;

Evidence of significant participation in a prior season for a U.S. college or university in intercollegiate competition;

A written statement from an official of the governing body of the sport detailing the person’s or team’s international recognition;

A written statement from a recognized expert or member of the sports media detailing the person’s or team’s international recognition;

Evidence that the person or team is ranked if the sport has international rankings; or

Evidence the person or team has received a significant honor or award in the sport.

Entertainment Group

In general, the petitioner must submit evidence of the group's nomination or receipt of significant international awards or prizes for outstanding achievement in its field or three forms of the following types of documentation:[10]

Critical reviews, advertisements, publicity releases, publications, contracts, or endorsements showing that the group has performed and will perform as a starring or leading entertainment group in productions or events with a distinguished reputation;

Reviews in major newspapers, trade journals, magazines, or other published material showing the group’s international recognition and acclaim for outstanding achievement in its field;

Articles in newspapers, trade journals, publications, or testimonials showing that the group has performed and will perform services as a leading or starring group for organizations and establishments that have a distinguished reputation;

Ratings, standing in the field, box office receipts, recording or video sales, and other achievements in the field, as reported in articles in major newspapers, trade journals, or other publications showing major commercial or critically acclaimed success;

Testimonials showing that the group has achieved significant recognition for achievements from organizations, critics, government agencies, or other recognized experts in the field; or

Contracts or other reliable evidence that the group has either commanded or will command a high salary or other substantial remuneration for services comparable to others similarly situated in the field.

Circus Group

The petitioner must submit evidence the beneficiary is coming to join (perform in) a circus that has been recognized nationally as outstanding for a sustained and substantial period or as part of such a circus.[11]

Essential Support Personnel

The petitioner must submit a statement describing the support personnel’s prior essentiality and skills and experience with the principal beneficiary, group, or team.[12]

B. Evidence for P-2 Nonimmigrant Classification
A petition filed on behalf of a person seeking P-2 nonimmigrant classification should be submitted with the following supporting evidence: the consultation,[13] a copy of the reciprocal agreement, and evidence that the beneficiaries are subject to the reciprocal exchange.[14] A list of negotiated P-2 reciprocal agreements is maintained on the P-2 Individual Performer or Part of a Group Entering to Perform Under a Reciprocal Exchange Program webpage. If a reciprocal agreement is submitted other than those listed, the officer must review the agreement to determine if the agreement adheres to the regulatory standard.[15]

C. Evidence for P-3 Nonimmigrant Classification
A petition filed on behalf of a person seeking P-3 nonimmigrant classification should be submitted with the following supporting evidence:[16]

Affidavits, testimonials, or letters from recognized experts attesting to the authenticity of the person’s or the group’s skills in performing, presenting, coaching, or teaching the unique or traditional art form and giving the credentials of the expert, including the basis of his or her knowledge of the person’s or group’s skill; or

Documentation that the performance of the person or group is culturally unique, as evidenced by reviews in newspapers, journals, or other published materials.

In addition, the petition must be submitted with evidence that all of the performances or presentations will be culturally unique events.

D. Consultation Requirement
1. Statutorily Mandated Consultation Process
Along with the supporting documentation, a statutorily mandated consultation process exists for all P petitions.[17] This consultation must be from an appropriate labor organization and address the nature of the work to be done and the person’s qualifications or, for certain classifications, the organization may indicate it has no objection to approval of the petition.[18] The petitioner has the burden of furnishing a consultation.

The source and contents of the consultation varies, depending upon the type of petition as shown in the table below.

Consultation Requirement
Petition

Source and Contents of Consultation

P-1

Consultation with an appropriate labor organization is required if one exists. The consultation must evaluate the person's (group's) qualifications and state whether the services or performances are appropriate for an internationally recognized athlete or entertainment group.[19] The labor organization may also issue a letter of no objection.

P-2

Consultation with an appropriate labor organization to verify that a bona fide reciprocal agreement exists.[20]

P-3

Consultation with an appropriate labor organization to evaluate the cultural uniqueness of the entertainer(s) and whether the performances are in a cultural program appropriate for the P-3 classification.[21] The labor organization may also issue a letter of no objection.

Essential Support Personnel

Consultation with an appropriate labor organization. Consultation must evaluate the essential character of the work, the relationship between the principal and support workers, and the availability of U.S. workers to do the job.[22] The labor organization may also issue a letter of no objection.

The regulations specify mandatory response times for consultations for expedited cases and prescribe action to be taken when a requested opinion is not received.[23] The consultations are advisory in nature only and are not binding on USCIS.[24] A negative consultation does not automatically result in the denial of the petition, as decisions must be based on the totality of the evidence. Accordingly, if the petitioner submits evidence that overcomes a negative advisory opinion and which establishes the merits of the person, USCIS may approve the petition.

2. Petitions Meriting Expedited Processing
If USCIS has determined that a petition merits expeditious handling, USCIS contacts the appropriate labor organization and requests an advisory opinion if one is not submitted by the petitioner. The organization then has 24 hours to respond to the request. If no response to the request is received, then USCIS renders a decision on the petition without an advisory opinion.[25]

Chapter 5 - Adjudication
A. Approvals
If the necessary required evidence has been submitted and all requirements have been met, the officer approves the petition and issues a Notice of Action (Form I-797) showing the period of validity and the beneficiary’s name and classification.

1. Validity Period of Petition for Athletes and Entertainers
The approval period for a P nonimmigrant petition must conform to the limits outlined in the table below.

Approval Period for a P Nonimmigrant Petition
Nonimmigrant Classification

Validity Period

P-1

(individual athlete)

Up to 5 years[1]

P-1

(team or entertainment group)

Period of time determined by USCIS to be necessary to complete the event or activity, but not to exceed 1 year[2]

P-2

Period of time determined by USCIS to be necessary to complete the event or activity, but not to exceed 1 year[3]

P-3

Period of time determined by USCIS to be necessary to complete the event or activity, but not to exceed 1 year[4]

If the petition is approved after the date the petitioner indicated services would begin, the approved petition shows a validity period commencing with the date of approval and up to the date requested by the petitioner, not to exceed the maximum period described above.[5]

If the petitioner filed Form I-129 to extend the validity of the original petition in order to continue or complete the same activities or events specified in the original petition, an extension of stay may be authorized in increments of up to 1 year. P-1 individual athletes may be extended for up to 5 years, not to exceed 10 years in total.[6]

A beneficiary may be admitted to the United States for the validity period of the petition, plus a period of up to 10 days before the validity period begins and 10 days after the validity period ends. The beneficiary may not work except during the validity period of the petition.[7]

2. Validity Period of Petition for Essential Support Personnel
Current DHS regulations provide that an approved P-1 petition for an individual athlete (also known as a P-1A) are valid for a period of up to 5 years.[8] The general rule for the approval period of a P-1 petition for essential support personnel (also known as P-1S) states that the approved petition must only be valid for a period of time determined by USCIS to be necessary to complete the event for which the P-1 is admitted, not to exceed 1 year.[9]

The exception to that general rule is the period for an extension of stay to continue or complete the same event or activity for essential support personnel of a P-1A individual athlete, which may be approved for a period of up to 5 years, for a total period of stay not to exceed 10 years.[10] USCIS interprets this exception at 8 CFR 214.2(p)(14) consistent with its plain language, such that the 5-year extension of stay for a P-1S for an individual athlete is only available when the petitioner requests an extension of stay (and not consulate notification) to continue or complete the same event or activity for a beneficiary who is in the United States in P-1S status at the time the petition extension is properly filed, and the extension of stay request is approved.[11]

Therefore, while the initial validity period of a P-1 petition for essential support personnel is limited to 1 year or less, the validity period of an extension of stay of essential support personnel of a P-1A individual athlete may exceed 1 year thereafter, provided that:

The purpose is to continue or complete the same event or activity for which they were admitted; and

The extension of stay validity period does not exceed the period of time necessary to complete the event (not to exceed 5 years, or a total period of stay of 10 years).

B. Denials
If the requirements have not been met, the officer should deny the petition. The petitioner must be notified of the decision, the reasons for denial, and the right to appeal the denial.[12] The denial of a petition to classify a beneficiary as a P nonimmigrant may be appealed to the Administrative Appeals Office. The appeal must be filed on a Notice of Appeal or Motion (Form I-290B) within 30 days of the decision.[13] There is no appeal from a decision to deny an extension of stay to the beneficiary.[14]

If the officer decides to incorporate into the denial decision a negative advisory opinion which USCIS has obtained (separate from one submitted by the petitioner), he or she must disclose the nature of the advisory opinion to the petitioner in a Notice of Intent to Deny (NOID) and give the petitioner an opportunity for rebuttal. 


Chapter 6 - Post-Adjudication Actions
A. Substitution of Beneficiaries
A petitioner may request a substitution for one or more members of a group on an approved petition by sending a letter requesting substitution and a copy of the  petitioner’s approval notice to a consular officer where the person will apply for a visa or immigration officer at a port of entry where the person will apply for admission.[1] A petitioner may not request substitutions for support personnel; rather, the petitioner must submit a new petition.[2]

If a group is already in the United States performing with approved P-1 classification and the group now needs to add or substitute members, the additions or substitutes should be petitioned for as P-1s.  In such instances, the petitioner must provide evidence of the original approval and the required consultation. In situations involving illness or exigent circumstances, USCIS may waive the 1 year relationship requirements.[3]

B. Revocations
The petitioner should immediately notify USCIS of any changes in the terms and conditions of employment of the beneficiary that may affect eligibility. USCIS may revoke a petition at any time, even after the validity of the petition has expired.

1. Automatic Revocation
The approval of an unexpired petition is automatically revoked if the petitioner, or the employer in a petition filed by an agent, goes out of business, files a written withdrawal of the petition, or notifies USCIS that the beneficiary is no longer employed by the petitioner.[4]

2. Revocation on Notice
When there is no provision that would result in automatic revocation, USCIS may issue a Notice of Intent to Revoke (NOIR) the approval of the petition, such as in cases where:

The beneficiary is no longer employed by the petitioner in the capacity specified in the petition;

The statement of facts contained in the petition was not true and correct;

The petitioner violated the terms or conditions of the approved petition;

The petitioner violated the statutory or regulatory provisions for P nonimmigrant classification; or

The approval of the petition violated the regulations or involved gross error.[5]

The NOIR should contain a detailed description of the grounds for the revocation and the time period allowed for the petitioner’s rebuttal.[6] USCIS considers all relevant evidence presented in determining whether to revoke the petition. A petition that has been revoked on notice may be appealed to the Administrative Appeals Office.[7] A petition that is automatically revoked may not be appealed.


Part O - Religious Workers (R)
Chapter 1 - Purpose and Background
A. Purpose
The Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) provides separate immigration classifications for religious workers depending on whether they seek to work in the United States on a permanent or a temporary basis.[1] Noncitizens working in the United States temporarily as a minister or in a religious vocation or occupation are eligible for the nonimmigrant religious worker (R-1) classification.[2]

B. Background
In 1990, Congress created new immigration classifications for religious workers, including the R-1 nonimmigrant classification and a special immigrant religious worker classification.[3]

In 2005, the USCIS Office of Fraud Detection and National Security (FDNS) conducted a Benefit Fraud Assessment of the special immigrant religious worker program by randomly selecting and reviewing pending and approved cases. As a result, USCIS issued a report finding significant fraud in the use of this classification.[4] This led USCIS to reconsider how it administered the special immigrant religious worker program.

In 2008, USCIS promulgated regulations that added requirements to establish eligibility for the special immigrant and nonimmigrant religious worker programs.[5] In part, the regulations introduced a requirement that a beneficiary’s prospective employer submit a petition for all R-1 nonimmigrants, including those outside of the United States.[6] The regulations also provided USCIS with discretionary authority to visit the petitioning employer's facility before issuing a decision.

C. Legal Authorities
INA 101(a)(15)(R) - Definition of R nonimmigrant classification

8 CFR 214.2(r) - Religious workers


Chapter 2 - General Requirements
A. Overview
The temporary nonimmigrant religious worker (R-1) classification allows religious workers to enter the United States, or change status from another nonimmigrant category, in order to temporarily perform services as a minister of religion or in a religious occupation or vocation.[1]

A noncitizen cannot self-petition for R-1 classification.[2] A U.S. employer must file a Petition for a Nonimmigrant Worker (Form I-129), seeking to classify a beneficiary as an R-1 nonimmigrant. In general, the petitioning R-1 employer must submit evidence demonstrating that:

The petitioner is either a bona fide non-profit religious organization, or a bona fide organization that is affiliated with the religious denomination;[3]

The beneficiary has been a member of the same type of religious denomination as that of the petitioner for the 2 years immediately preceding the time of application for admission;[4] and

The beneficiary is entering the United States for the purpose of undertaking a compensated (either salaried or non-salaried) position or, in certain circumstances, an uncompensated position that is part of an established program for temporary, uncompensated missionary work.[5]

B. Filing Process
USCIS requires a petitioning employer to file the Petition for a Nonimmigrant Worker (Form I-129), with the R-1 Classification Supplement and required fee, for all persons seeking an R-1 nonimmigrant classification.[6] This petition requirement also applies to visa-exempt religious workers, such as Canadian citizens.[7]

To qualify for R-1 nonimmigrant classification, the petitioning U.S. employer must submit the R-1 Employer Attestation that is included in the R-1 Classification Supplement and evidence documenting that the petitioner and beneficiary meet the requirements set forth below.[8] 

The petitioner should list all locations where the R-1 nonimmigrant will be working on the Petition for a Nonimmigrant Worker (Form I-129).[9] If it is anticipated that the R-1 nonimmigrant will be moved between different locations within a larger organization, that larger organization should petition for the worker. For example, a minister may move from ministry to ministry within a denomination, including at a different or additional unit of the religious denomination with a different federal tax number if the petitioning organization oversees all of these locations.

An R-1 nonimmigrant may work for more than one bona fide religious organization at the same time.[10] However, except as described in the previous paragraph (involving a larger employer overseeing multiple locations), when the beneficiary works for more than one employer, each employing organization must submit a separate Form I-129 and R-1 Classification Supplement, including the R-1 Employer Attestation, along with the appropriate documentation and fees.[11]

If a petitioner believes that one of the requirements for this classification substantially burdens the organization’s exercise of religion, it may seek an exemption under the Religious Freedom Restoration Act of 1993 (RFRA).[12] A written request for the exemption from a provision’s requirement should accompany the initial filing, and it must explain how the provision:

Requires participation in an activity prohibited by a sincerely held religious belief; or

Prevents participation in conduct motivated by a sincerely held religious belief.

The petitioner must support the request with relevant documentation.[13] The petitioner bears the burden of showing that it qualifies for an RFRA exemption. USCIS decides exemption requests on a case-by-case basis.

Chapter 3 - Petitioner Requirements
A. Qualifying Organization
The petitioner must attest it is either a bona fide non-profit religious organization or a bona fide organization that is affiliated with a religious denomination and is exempt from taxation. The authorizing official must sign the attestation, certifying that the attestation is true and correct.[1]

Bona Fide Non-profit Religious Organization[2]

A religious organization seeking to qualify as a “bona fide non-profit” religious organization in the United States is required to submit evidence that:

The organization is exempt from federal tax requirements as described in Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code (IRC) of 1986;[3] and

The organization has a currently valid determination letter from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) confirming such exemption.[4] 

In some cases, the petitioning entity may fall within the umbrella of a parent organization that has received a group tax exemption from the IRS. In these group tax-exempt cases, the petitioner may use the parent organization’s IRS determination letter, provided it submits that letter and presents evidence that it is covered under the group exemption granted to the parent organization and it is authorized by the parent organization to use its group tax exemption.

Examples on what may be submitted to show that a petitioner may use a group tax exemption letter from a parent organization include, but are not limited to:

A letter from the organization holding a group exemption as evidence that the petitioner is covered by such exemption; the letter from the organization named in the exemption must specifically acknowledge that the petitioner falls under the group exemption;

Copies of pages from a directory for the parent organization showing the petitioner as a member of the group;[5] 

The parent organization’s website that lists the petitioner as a member of the group covered by the exemption; and

An IRS letter confirming the petitioner’s coverage under the parent organization exemption.

While the IRS does not require religious organizations to obtain a determination letter, USCIS regulations require petitioners to submit a determination letter with the R-1 petition. USCIS reviews the information contained within the letter to determine if the IRS classified the organization as a religious organization, or as other than a religious organization. Determination letters from the IRS do not expire, but the IRS can revoke them. The IRS offers a web-based Tax Exempt Organization Search tool to verify an organization’s tax-exempt status. An organization may use this tool for its own purposes to obtain a printout showing its currently valid tax-exemption. However, such a printout does not satisfy the requirement for submission of an IRS determination letter.

Bona Fide Organization Affiliated with Religious Denomination[6]

A petitioner qualifies as a bona fide organization that is affiliated with a religious denomination if:

The organization is closely associated with the religious denomination;

The organization is exempt from federal tax requirements as described in IRC 501(c)(3); and

The organization has a currently valid determination letter from the IRS confirming such exemption.[7]

B. Petitioner Attestations[8]
The petitioner must provide information and specifically attest to the following (in addition to attesting that it is a qualifying R-1 employer):

The number of members of the petitioning employer’s organization;

The number of employees who work at the same location where the religious worker will be employed, and a summary of those employees’ responsibilities;

The number of religious workers holding special immigrant religious worker status or R-1 nonimmigrant status currently employed or employed within the past 5 years by the petitioning employer’s organization;

The number of special immigrant religious worker and R-1 nonimmigrant petitions and applications filed by or on behalf of any religious workers for employment by the petitioning employer in the past 5 years;

The title of the position offered to the beneficiary;

Detailed description of the beneficiary’s proposed daily duties;[9]

The particulars of the salaried or non-salaried compensation or self-support for the position;[10]

A statement that beneficiary will be employed at least 20 hours per week;

The specific location(s) of employment;

The beneficiary will not be engaged in secular employment;

The beneficiary is qualified to perform the duties of the offered position; and

The beneficiary has been a member of the denomination for at least 2 years.

C. Verification and Inspections
USCIS may conduct on-site inspections either before or after USCIS makes a final decision on the petition.[11] The purpose of the inspection is to verify the evidence submitted in support of the R-1 petition such as, but may not be limited to, the petitioner’s attestations and qualifications as a religious organization, the location(s) where the beneficiary will work, the organization’s facilities (including places of worship, where applicable), and the nature of the beneficiary’s proposed position.

The petitioner cannot use a foreign address, as the employer must be in the United States in order to petition for religious workers.[12]

1. Pre-approval Inspection[13]
Through the Administrative Site Visit and Verification Program (ASVVP), USCIS conducts pre-approval compliance reviews on all petitioners for religious workers. USCIS closely monitors the site visit program to ensure that it does not cause undue delays in the adjudication process. Satisfactory completion of the pre-approval compliance review, which can include an on-site inspection, is a condition for approval of the petition. The inspection may include:

A tour of the organization’s facilities (including places of worship, if applicable) and, if appropriate, the organization’s headquarters or satellite locations;

An interview with the organization’s officials;

A review of the organization’s records related to compliance with immigration laws and regulations; and

Any other interviews or review of any other records that USCIS considers pertinent to the integrity of the organization.

2. Post-adjudication Inspection
In addition, as part of the compliance review process, USCIS may conduct a post-adjudication inspection of the beneficiary’s work location to verify the beneficiary’s work hours, compensation, and duties or where the petitioner has undergone substantial changes since its last filing.[14] USCIS may also conduct “for cause” post-adjudication inspection in cases where there is suspected fraud.

D. Documentation and Evidence
General Evidence Required

An R-1 petitioner is required to provide the following documentation and evidence to show the petitioner is a qualifying religious organization:[15]

A properly completed current version of the Petition for a Nonimmigrant Worker (Form I-129) and R-1 Classification Supplement;

A currently valid determination letter from the IRS establishing that the organization is a tax-exempt organization;[16] and

Verifiable evidence of how the petitioner intends to compensate the beneficiary, including whether or not the beneficiary will be self-supporting.

Additional Evidence Required – Group Tax-Exempt Religious Organizations

In addition to the general evidence requirements, a group tax-exempt religious organization is required to provide evidence that it is included under the group exemption granted to a parent organization.[17] USCIS also requires evidence that the parent organization has authorized the petitioning entity to use its tax-exempt status.

Furthermore, an organization whose IRS determination letter does not identify its tax exemption as a religious organization must establish its religious nature and purpose. Such evidence may include the entity’s articles of incorporation or bylaws, flyers, articles, brochures, or other literature that describes the religious purpose and nature of the organization.

Additional Evidence Required – Organization Affiliated with Religious Denomination

In addition to the general evidence requirements, a bona fide organization that is affiliated with the religious denomination is also required to submit a Religious Denomination Certification signed by an authorized official of the religious denomination, certifying that the petitioning organization is affiliated with the religious denomination.[18]

If the affiliated organization was granted tax-exempt status under IRC 501(c)(3) under a category other than religious organization, in addition to the general requirements, the petitioner must also provide:

Documentation that establishes the religious nature and purpose of the organization, such as a copy of the organizing instrument of the organization that specifies the purposes of the organization; and

Organizational literature, such as books, articles, brochures, calendars, flyers, and other literature describing the religious purpose and nature of the activities of the organization.[19]

Table Summarizing Evidentiary Requirements

The table below serves as a quick reference guide for the evidence required depending on the type of R-1 nonimmigrant petitioner.

Summary of Evidence Requirements Relating to the R-1 Nonimmigrant Petition
Type of Petitioner

Required Evidence

Tax-Exempt 501(c)(3) Religious Organization

A currently valid determination letter from the IRS establishing that the organization is tax-exempt.

Group Tax-Exempt Religious Organization

A currently valid determination letter from the IRS establishing that the group is tax-exempt.

Documentation that the organization is covered under the group tax exemption, including, for example, a letter from the parent organization authorizing the petitioner to use its group tax exemption, a directory for that organization listing the petitioner as a member of the group, a membership listing on the parent organization’s website that confirms coverage under its exemption, or a letter from the IRS confirming the coverage.

If the submitted IRS determination letter does not identify the organization’s tax exemption as a religious organization, then evidence establishing its religious nature and purpose. Such evidence may include, but is not limited to, the entity’s articles of incorporation or bylaws, flyers, articles, brochures, or other literature that describes the religious purpose and nature of the organization.

Bona Fide Organization Affiliated with Religious Denomination

A currently valid determination letter from the IRS establishing that the organization is tax-exempt.

If the organization was granted tax-exempt status under IRC 501(c)(3) as something other than a religious organization, then:

documentation that establishes the religious nature and purpose of the organization, including, but not limited to, a copy of the organizing instrument that specifies the purposes of the organization, organizational literature, such as books, articles, brochures, calendars, flyers, and other literature describing the religious purpose and nature of the activities of the organization.

A Religious Denomination Certification signed by the religious denominational entity (not the petitioner) that the petitioner is affiliated with, which is part of the Petition for a Nonimmigrant Worker (Form I-129), R-1 Classification Supplement, certifying that the petitioning organization is affiliated with the religious denomination.

E. Employer Obligations[20]
The beneficiary’s employer must notify DHS within 14 calendar days if:

The beneficiary is working less than the required number of hours;

The beneficiary has been released from the employment; or

The beneficiary has otherwise terminated employment before the expiration of a period of authorized R-1 nonimmigrant stay.

F. Compensation Requirement[21]
An R-1 nonimmigrant must receive either salaried or non-salaried compensation, or provide his or her own support as a missionary under an established missionary program. The petitioner is required to state either how it intends to compensate the R-1 nonimmigrant or how the R-1 nonimmigrant will be self-supporting as part of an established missionary program, and to submit the corresponding, verifiable evidence described below.[22] To the extent that the R-1 nonimmigrant will receive funds or other benefits (such as housing) from a third party, this arrangement does not constitute compensation from the petitioner.[23] 

1. Salaried or Non-salaried Compensation
Compensation may be salaried or non-salaried. Salaried means receiving traditional pay such as a paycheck. Non-salaried means any of the following (separately or in combination): receiving support such as room, board, medical care, and transportation instead of or in addition to a paycheck.

The petitioner must submit IRS documentation of compensation, such as IRS Forms W-2 or tax returns, if available. If IRS documentation is unavailable, then the petitioning employer must explain why it is unavailable and submit comparable verifiable documentation.[24]

When the beneficiary will receive salaried or non-salaried compensation, the petitioning employer may also submit verifiable evidence such as:[25]

Documentation of past compensation for similar positions;

Budgets showing monies set aside for salaries, leases, etc.;

Documentary evidence demonstrating that room and board will be provided; or

Other evidence acceptable to USCIS.[26]

While the regulation does not require audited financial reports, unaudited budgets or financial statements should be accompanied by supporting evidence that is verifiable. For example, budgets should be generally consistent with past revenue and supported by bank statements showing listed cash balances. When relying on bank statements, they should show an availability of sufficient funds to cover the beneficiary’s salaried compensation over a sufficient period of time.

Further, USCIS does not consider salaried or non-salaried support deriving from a third party as a portion of the beneficiary’s required compensation. The regulation requires that compensation derive from the petitioner.[27] Room and board at a church member’s home, or provided by any other church, is a form of third-party compensation. Unless the church reimburses the other party for this room and board, such arrangements are not a qualifying form of non-salaried compensation. A petitioner may also submit evidence such as proof that it owns the property or a lease showing it pays for the residential space to establish that it is the entity providing non-salaried compensation.

2. Self-Support
Self-support means that the position the beneficiary will hold is part of an established program for temporary, uncompensated missionary work, and part of a broader international program of missionary work the denomination sponsors.[28]

An established program for temporary, uncompensated missionary work, is defined to be a missionary program in which:

Foreign workers, whether compensated or uncompensated, have previously participated in R-1 status;

Missionary workers are traditionally uncompensated;

The organization provides formal training for missionaries; and

Participation in such missionary work is an established element of religious development in that denomination.[29]

If the beneficiary will be self-supporting, the petitioner must provide:

Evidence demonstrating that the petitioner has an established program for temporary, uncompensated missionary work;

Evidence demonstrating that the denomination maintains missionary programs both in the United States and abroad;

Evidence of the beneficiary’s acceptance into the missionary program;

Evidence demonstrating the religious duties and responsibilities associated with the traditionally uncompensated missionary work; and

Copies of the beneficiary’s bank records, budgets documenting the sources of self-support (including personal or family savings, room and board with host families in the United States, donations from the denomination’s churches) or other verifiable evidence acceptable to USCIS.[30]

3. Multiple Beneficiaries
A petitioner is required to attest to the number of special immigrant religious worker and R-1 nonimmigrants it currently employs, the number it has employed within the last 5 years, as well as the number of petitions and applications filed by or on behalf of any special immigrant religious worker and R-1 nonimmigrant for employment by the prospective employer within the last 5 years.[31] Where the petitioner has filed for multiple beneficiaries, the petitioner may be required to demonstrate that it has the ability to compensate all of its employees, including R-1 nonimmigrants.


Chapter 4 - Beneficiary Requirements
To qualify for a temporary nonimmigrant religious worker (R-1) classification, the beneficiary must:

Be a member of a religious denomination having a bona fide non-profit religious organization in the United States for at least the 2 years immediately preceding the filing of the petition;

Be coming to the United States to work at least in a part-time position (at least 20 hours per week);

Be coming solely as a minister or to perform a religious vocation or occupation;

Be coming to or remaining in the United States at the request of the petitioner to work for the petitioner; and

Not work in the United States in any capacity not approved in a DHS-approved petition.[1] 

The beneficiary must also intend to depart the United States upon the expiration or termination of his or her nonimmigrant status. However, a nonimmigrant petition, application for initial admission, change of status, or extension of stay in R classification may not be denied solely on the basis of a filed or an approved request for permanent labor certification or a filed or approved immigrant visa preference petition.[2]

A. Qualifying Employment
The beneficiary must be coming to engage in a religious vocation or in a religious occupation, or as a minister of religion.

Religious Worker[3]

For the purpose of the R-1 nonimmigrant classification, a religious worker is someone who:

Is a member of the religious denomination that has a bona fide non-profit religious organization in the United States, and was a member in the same type of religious denomination for at least 2 years immediately preceding the time of application for admission;

Is coming to the United States to work at least part-time (at least 20 hours per week);

Is coming to the United States solely to perform a religious vocation or occupation in either a professional or nonprofessional capacity, or as a minister;

Is coming to or remaining in the United States at the request of the petitioner to work for the petitioner;

Will not work in the United States in any capacity other than that of a religious worker; and

Is engaged in and, according to the denomination's standards, qualified for a religious occupation or vocation, whether or not in a professional capacity, or as a minister.

Religious Vocation

A religious vocation is a formal lifetime commitment through vows, investitures, ceremonies, or similar indications to a religious way of life. People within a religious vocation dedicate their lives to religious practices and functions, as distinguished from secular members of a denomination.[4] The regulations state that the religious denomination must have a class of persons whose lives are dedicated to religious practices and functions, as distinguished from the secular members of the religion.

Religious Occupation[5]

In order for USCIS to consider the employment a religious occupation, the title of the position is not determinative; rather, USCIS looks at whether the occupation meets all of the following requirements:

The duties must primarily relate to a traditional religious function and be recognized as a religious occupation within the denomination;

The duties must be primarily related to, and must clearly involve, inculcating (teaching and instilling in others) or carrying out the religious creed and beliefs of the denomination;

The duties do not include positions which are primarily administrative or supportive in nature, although limited administrative duties that are only incidental to religious functions are permissible;[6] and

Religious study or training for religious work does not constitute a religious occupation, but a religious worker may pursue study or training, incident to status, while in the United States as an R-1 nonimmigrant.

Minister[7]

For the purpose of R-1 nonimmigrant classification, a minister is someone who:

Is fully authorized by and trained in the religious denomination to conduct religious worship, and perform other duties usually performed by authorized members of the clergy of the denomination;

Performs activities rationally related to being a minister;

Works solely as a minister in the United States which may include administrative duties incidental to the duties of a minister; and

Is not a lay preacher or a person not authorized to perform clergy’s duties.

B. Religious Denomination
A religious denomination is a religious group or community of believers that have a common type of ecclesiastical government that governs or administers and includes one or more of the following:

A recognized common creed or statement of faith shared among the denomination’s members;

A common form of worship;

A common formal code of doctrine and discipline;

Common religious services and ceremonies;

Common established places of religious worship or religious congregations; or

Comparable indications of a bona fide religious denomination.[8]

The R-1 nonimmigrant beneficiary must have at least 2 years, immediately preceding the filing of the petition, of membership in a religious denomination.[9] Such membership must be in the same type of religious denomination in which the beneficiary will work in the United States.[10]

C. Nonimmigrant Intent
To be eligible for R-1 nonimmigrant classification, the beneficiary must maintain an intention to depart the United States upon the expiration or termination of such R-1 nonimmigrant status, if granted.[11] However, a nonimmigrant petition, application for initial admission, change of status, or extension of stay in R-1 nonimmigrant classification may not be denied solely based on the beneficiary’s pursuit of permanent residence in the United States (for example, evidence of a filed or approved request for permanent labor certification or immigrant petition on the beneficiary’s behalf).[12]

D. Documentation and Evidence
The petitioner must submit evidence to establish that the beneficiary meets the requirements for R-1 nonimmigrant classification.[13]

Ministers

For a beneficiary who is a minister, the petitioner must submit the following:

A copy of the beneficiary’s certificate of ordination or similar documents;

Documents reflecting acceptance of the beneficiary’s qualifications as a minister in the religious denomination; and

Evidence that the beneficiary has completed any course of prescribed theological education at an accredited theological institution normally required or recognized by that religious denomination, including transcripts, curriculum, and documentation that establishes that the theological education is accredited by the denomination.[14]

For denominations that do not require a theological education, rather than document such education, the petitioner must instead submit evidence of:

The denomination’s requirements for ordination to minister;

Duties allowed to be performed by virtue of ordination;

The denomination’s levels of ordination, if any; and

The beneficiary’s completion of the denomination’s requirements for ordination.[15]

Religious Vocations and Occupations

For a beneficiary who will work in a religious vocation or occupation, the petitioner must submit evidence of the following:

The beneficiary is entering the United States to perform a religious vocation or occupation, defined above (in either a professional or nonprofessional capacity);[16]

The beneficiary is qualified for the religious occupation or vocation according to the denomination’s standards.[17]

E. Family Members
1. Initial Petition
The spouse and unmarried children under 21 years old of a principal R-1 nonimmigrant may qualify for dependent R-2 status if their primary purpose in coming to the United States is to join or accompany the principal R-1 nonimmigrant.[18]

In general, the spouse and children are granted R-2 nonimmigrant status for the same period of time and subject to the same conditions as the principal R-1 nonimmigrant, regardless of the amount of time the spouse and children may already have spent in the United States in R-2 status.[19]

2. Request to Extend or Change Nonimmigrant Status
R-2 dependents may request an extension of stay or change of status by filing an Application to Extend/Change Nonimmigrant Status (Form I-539).

3. Employment Authorization Prohibited
An R-2 dependent may not accept employment in the United States.[20]


Chapter 5 - Adjudication
Officers must carefully review each petition for a nonimmigrant religious worker (R-1) to ensure compliance with the intent of the R-1 nonimmigrant category to allow religious workers to temporarily work in the United States. Officers should apply a “preponderance of the evidence” standard when evaluating eligibility for the benefit sought.[1] The burden of proving eligibility for the benefit sought rests entirely with the petitioner.[2]

A. Decision
1. Approvals
If the petitioner properly filed the Petition for a Nonimmigrant Worker (Form I-129) and the officer is satisfied that the petitioner has met the required eligibility standards, the officer should approve the petition. The approval period should not exceed the maximum period of stay allowed.[3]

The table below provides a list of the classifications for R nonimmigrants.

Classes of Beneficiaries and Corresponding Codes of Admission
Beneficiary

Code of Admission

Religious Worker (Principal)

R-1

Spouse of a Principal Religious Worker

R-2

Child of a Principal Religious Worker

R-2

Once USCIS approves the petition, the officer must notify the petitioner of the action taken using a Notice of Action (Form I-797).[4]

2. Denials
If the petitioner does not meet the eligibility requirements, the officer must deny the petition.[5] If the officer denies the petition, he or she must prepare a final notice of action, which includes information explaining why the petition is denied.[6] Additionally, officers should include information about appeal rights and the opportunity to file a motion to reopen or reconsider in the denial notice. The office that issued the decision has jurisdiction over any motion and the Administrative Appeals Office (AAO) has jurisdiction over any appeal.[7]

B. Revocations[8]
USCIS may revoke the approval of a petition at any time. USCIS automatically revokes the approval of the petition if the petitioner ceases to exist or files a written withdrawal of the petition.[9] A notice of intent to revoke (NOIR) is necessary where there is no regulatory provision that would allow for an automatic revocation, such as where:

The beneficiary is no longer employed by the petitioner in the capacity specified in the petition;

The statement of facts contained in the petition was not true and correct;

The petitioner violated the terms and conditions of the approved petition;

The petitioner violated the statutory or regulatory requirements; or

The approval of the petition violated the regulations or involved gross error.[10]

The NOIR should contain a detailed statement of the grounds for the revocation and the time period allowed for the petitioner’s rebuttal. USCIS must consider all relevant evidence presented in deciding whether to revoke the approval of the petition.[11]

The petitioner may appeal the decision to revoke the approval of a petition to the AAO if the petition’s approval was revoked on notice. Automatic revocations may not be appealed.[12] 


Chapter 6 - Admissions, Extensions of Stay, and Changes of Status
A. Admission
If approved for nonimmigrant religious worker (R-1) classification and found otherwise admissible, a beneficiary may be admitted as an R-1 nonimmigrant for an initial period of up to 30 months from the date of initial admission.[1]

Maintaining Status

A religious worker may only work per the terms of the approved petition. While holding R-1 status, nonimmigrants may not work in the United States in any other capacity but as a religious worker, and cannot change capacities between a minister or other types of religious worker unless specifically approved.[2] An R-1 nonimmigrant may be considered to have violated his or her nonimmigrant status, and therefore not be in lawful immigration status, if he or she works for an employer who has not obtained prior approval of such employment through the filing of a petition and appropriate supplement, supporting documents, and appropriate fees.[3]

B. Extension of Stay
An employer may request an extension of stay for an R-1 nonimmigrant on the Petition for a Nonimmigrant Worker (Form I-129).[4] The extension may be for the validity period of the extension request, up to 30 months, for a maximum period of stay for up to 5 years.[5]

The petitioner must include the following with the Form I-129:

R-1 Classification Supplement, including the R-1 Employer Attestation;

Supporting documents to establish eligibility under the R-1 nonimmigrant classification, including documentation of salaried or non-salaried compensation; and

Initial evidence of the previous R-1 employment, such as financial or other records to establish that the person worked as an R-1 nonimmigrant.[6]

1. Compensation Documentation[7]
Salaried Compensation

Any request for an extension of stay as an R-1 nonimmigrant must include initial evidence of the previous employment as a religious worker. If the beneficiary received salaried compensation, then the petitioner must submit Internal Revenue Service (IRS) documentation of salaried compensation, such as an IRS Form W-2 or certified copies of filed income tax returns, reflecting such work and compensation for the preceding 2 years.[8]

If the beneficiary was admitted for less than 2 years in the R-1 nonimmigrant status, the petitioner may provide evidence of work and compensation in that status for the duration of the beneficiary’s authorized admission.[9]

Non-Salaried Compensation

If the beneficiary is requesting an extension of stay as an R-1 nonimmigrant and previously received non-salaried compensation, the petitioner must submit IRS documentation of the non-salaried compensation if available.[10] If no IRS documentation is available, the petitioner must explain the lack of IRS documentation and submit verifiable evidence of all financial support, including information on:[11]

Stipends;

Room and board;

Other support for the beneficiary along with a description of the location where the beneficiary lived (for example, a lease for the beneficiary); or

Other evidence acceptable to USCIS.

Self-Support[12]

If the beneficiary is applying for an extension of stay as an R-1 nonimmigrant and was previously supporting him or herself financially and not receiving any compensation from the religious organization, the petitioner must provide verifiable documents to show how the beneficiary is self-supporting. Documentation may include:

Audited financial statements;

Financial institution records;

Brokerage account statements;

Trust documents signed by an attorney; or

Other evidence acceptable to USCIS.

The table below summarizes the evidence required depending on the type of compensation.

Extension of Stay Requests: Evidence of Beneficiary’s Compensation
Beneficiary’s Previous Compensation

Required Evidence

Salary

The petitioner must submit IRS documentation showing that the beneficiary received a salary, such as an IRS Form W-2 or certified copies of filed income tax returns reflecting such work and compensation for the preceding 2 years or the period of stay if less than 2 years.

Non-Salary

If IRS documentation is available, the petitioner must submit IRS documentation of the non-salaried compensation.

If IRS documentation is not available, the petitioner must explain the lack of IRS documentation and submit verifiable evidence of all financial support, such as stipends, room and board, or other support for the beneficiary along with a description of the location where the beneficiary lived, or a lease for the beneficiary. The petitioner may also submit other evidence acceptable to USCIS.

No Salary, But Provided Own Support

Provide verifiable documents to show how support was maintained, such as audited financial statements, financial institution records, brokerage account statements, trust documents signed by an attorney, or other evidence acceptable to USCIS.

2. Requests for Evidence
With regard to a beneficiary’s eligibility for an extension of stay, an officer may issue a request for evidence (RFE) to the petitioner if it appears that the beneficiary has not maintained his or her status due to the following reasons:

Termination – USCIS has been notified that the beneficiary was terminated from the employment before the expiration of a period of authorized R-1 stay;

Released from Employment – USCIS has been notified that the beneficiary has been released from employment before the expiration of a period of authorized R-1 stay; or

Worked Less Than Required Hours – USCIS has been notified that the beneficiary is working less than the required number of hours for the employment.[13]

C. Change of Status
Generally, a beneficiary in a current valid nonimmigrant status who has not violated his or her status is eligible to change status to an R-1 nonimmigrant in the United States without having to return to his or her home country for a visa interview.[14] Such a beneficiary may be granted R-1 status for an initial period of up to 30 months.[15]

To change nonimmigrant statuses, the petitioning employer should file a Petition for a Nonimmigrant Worker (Form I-129) before the beneficiary’s current status expires and indicate the request is for a change of status. The beneficiary cannot work in the new R-1 nonimmigrant classification until USCIS approves the petition and the change of status request. If USCIS determines that the beneficiary is eligible for R-1 nonimmigrant, but not a change of status, the beneficiary must apply for an R-1 nonimmigrant visa at a U.S. consular post abroad and then be readmitted to the United States as an R-1 nonimmigrant.[16]

D. Change of Employer
USCIS considers any unauthorized change to a new employer a failure to maintain status. If the R-1 nonimmigrant is to be employed by a different or additional unit of the religious denomination (if it has a different federal tax number), the employer must file a new Form I-129. Such a circumstance would be considered new employment.

However, an example of a permissible employment location change that would not require a new petition would be a petition filed on behalf of a minister who moves from ministry to ministry within a denomination so long as the organization that oversees all of these locations is the petitioner for that minister.[17]


Chapter 7 - Period of Stay
A. Maximum Period of Stay
An eligible noncitizen may be admitted as a nonimmigrant religious worker (R-1) or may change status to R-1 nonimmigrant classification for a period of up to 30 months from the date of initial admission.[1] USCIS may grant one extension for up to 30 months, but with the total period of stay not to exceed the statutory maximum of 5 years (60 months) if the R-1 nonimmigrant is otherwise eligible.[2]

An R-1 nonimmigrant may be subject to removal if he or she violates the terms of his or her status, such as remaining in the United States longer than the period of his or her authorized stay.

B. Exceptions to Limitation on Total Stay[3]
A beneficiary who has spent 5 years in the United States in R-1 nonimmigrant status may not be readmitted to or receive an extension of stay in the United States under the R-1 nonimmigrant classification, unless such a beneficiary subsequently has resided abroad and been physically present outside the United States for the immediate prior year. However, this 5-year limitation does not apply to beneficiaries who:

Did not reside continually in the United States and whose employment in the United States was seasonal or intermittent or was for an aggregate of 6 months or less per year; or

Reside abroad and regularly commute to the United States to engage in part-time employment.

Petitioners and beneficiaries must meet all qualifications for the exception to the limitation on total stay, and must provide clear and convincing evidence that they qualify for the exception. Such proof may include arrival and departure records, transcripts of processed income tax returns, and records of employment abroad.

C. Recapture Time
USCIS only counts time physically spent in the United States in the R-1 nonimmigrant status towards the maximum 5 years of authorized stay. Officers should count only time spent physically in the United States in valid R-1 status toward the 5-year maximum period of stay.

When requesting an extension, the petitioner, on behalf of the R-1 nonimmigrant, may request that full calendar days spent outside the United States during the period of petition validity be recaptured and added back to his or her remainder of the total maximum period of stay, regardless of whether the R-1 nonimmigrant is currently in the United States or abroad and regardless of whether he or she currently holds R-1 nonimmigrant status.

It is the burden of the petitioner, on behalf of the beneficiary, to demonstrate continuing eligibility for the classification and that the beneficiary is entitled to recapture time with appropriate evidence. The reason for the absence is not relevant to whether the time may be recaptured. Any trip of at least one 24-hour calendar day outside the United States for any purpose, personal or professional, can be recaptured.

1. Evidence
The burden of proof remains with the R-1 petitioner, on behalf of the beneficiary, to submit evidence documenting periods of physical presence outside the United States when seeking an extension of petition validity and extension of stay as an R-1 nonimmigrant. The R-1 nonimmigrant is in the best position to organize and submit evidence of his or her departures from and readmissions to the United States. While a summary, charts of travel, or both are often submitted to facilitate review of the accompanying documentation, independent documentary evidence, such as photocopies of passport stamps, Arrival/Departure Records (Form I-94), and plane tickets establishing that the R-1 beneficiary was outside the United States during all of the days, weeks, or months that he or she seeks to recapture is always required.

The fact that the burden may not be met for some claimed periods generally has no bearing on other claimed periods for which the burden has been met. Any periods for which the burden has been met may be added to the eligible period of admission upon approval of the application for extension of status. An R-1 beneficiary may not be granted an extension of stay for periods that are not supported by independent documentary evidence. It is not necessary to issue a request for evidence (RFE) for any claimed periods unsupported by independent documentary evidence.

2. Applicability to R-2 Dependents
The status of an R-2 dependent of a principal R-1 nonimmigrant is subject to the same period of admission and limitations as the principal beneficiary, regardless of the time such spouse and children may have spent in the United States in R-2 status.[4] For example, if an R-1 nonimmigrant is able to recapture a 2-week missionary trip abroad, then his or her R-2 dependents, if seeking an extension of stay, should be given an extension of stay up to the new expiration of the R-1 nonimmigrant’s period of stay.

3. Seasonal or Intermittent Employment Exception
An R-1 nonimmigrant is eligible for the exception to the limitation of stay requirements by demonstrating that he or she:

Did not reside continually in the United States and that his or her employment in the United States was seasonal or intermittent or was for an aggregate of 6 months or less per year; or

Resides abroad and regularly commutes to the United States to engage in part-time employment.

To qualify for this exception, the petitioner and the beneficiary must provide clear and convincing proof that the beneficiary qualifies for such an exception. Such proof generally consists of evidence such as: Arrival/Departure Records (Form I-94), transcripts of processed income tax returns, and records of employment abroad.

Part P - NAFTA Professionals (TN)
In May 2020, USCIS retired its Adjudicator’s Field Manual (AFM), a collection of our immigration policies and procedures. We are working quickly to update and incorporate all of the AFM content into the USCIS Policy Manual, the agency’s centralized online repository for immigration policies. Until then, we have moved any remaining AFM content to its corresponding Policy Manual Part. To the extent that a provision in the Policy Manual conflicts with remaining AFM content or Policy Memoranda, the updated information in the Policy Manual prevails. If you have questions or concerns about any discrepancies among these resources, contact USCISPolicyManual@uscis.dhs.gov.

AFM Chapter 30 - Nonimmigrants in General (External) (PDF, 412.67 KB)

Part Q - Nonimmigrants Intending to Adjust Status (K, V)
In May 2020, USCIS retired its Adjudicator’s Field Manual (AFM), a collection of our immigration policies and procedures. We are working quickly to update and incorporate all of the AFM content into the USCIS Policy Manual, the agency’s centralized online repository for immigration policies. Until then, we have moved any remaining AFM content to its corresponding Policy Manual Part. To the extent that a provision in the Policy Manual conflicts with remaining AFM content or Policy Memoranda, the updated information in the Policy Manual prevails. If you have questions or concerns about any discrepancies among these resources, contact USCISPolicyManual@uscis.dhs.gov.

AFM Chapter 37 - Nonimmigrants Intending to Adjust Status (K and V Classifications) (External) (PDF, 136.8 KB)
